Observed Warming and its Causes  Global surface temperature was around 1.1°C above 1850–1900 in 2011–2020 64, with larger increases over land than over the ocean 65 . Observed warming is human-caused, with warming from greenhouse gases, dominated by CO2 and methane, partly masked by aerosol cooling. Global surface temperature in the first two decades of the 21st century was 0.99 [0.84 to 1.10]°C higher than 1850–1900. Global surface temperature has increased faster since 1970 than in any other 50-year period over at least the last 2000 years. The likely range of total human-caused global surface temperature increase from 1850–1900 to 2010–201966 is 0.8°C to 1.3°C, with a best estimate of 1.07°C. It is likely that well-mixed GHGs 67 contributed a warming of 1.0°C to 2.0°C, and other human drivers contributed a cooling of 0.0°C to 0.8°C, natural drivers changed global surface temperature by ±0.1°C and internal variability changed it by ±0.2°C.  Observed increases in well-mixed GHG concentrations since around 1750 are unequivocally caused by GHG emissions from human activities. Land and ocean sinks have taken up a near-constant proportion of CO2 emissions from human activities over the past six decades, with regional differences. In 2019, atmospheric CO2 concentrations reached 410 parts per million, CH 4 reached 1866 parts per billion and nitrous oxide reached 332 ppb. Other major contributors to warming are tropospheric ozone and halogenated gases. Concentrations of CH 4 and N2 O have increased to levels unprecedented in at least 800, years, and there is high confidence that current CO 2 concentrations are higher than at any time over at least the past two million years. Since 1750, increases in CO 2 and CH4 concentrations far exceed – and increases in N2 O are similar to – the natural multi-millennial changes between glacial and interglacial periods over at least the past 800, years. The net cooling effect which arises from anthropogenic aerosols peaked in the late 20th century .  Average annual GHG emissions during 2010–2019 were higher than in any previous decade, but the rate of growth between 2010 and 2019 was lower than that between 2000 and 2009  69 . Historical cumulative net CO 2 emissions from 1850 to 2019 were 2400 ±240 GtCO2. Of these, more than half occurred between 1850 and 1989 [1400 ±195 GtCO 2], and about 42% between 1990 and 2019 [1000 ±90 GtCO2]. Global net anthropogenic GHG emissions have been estimated to be 59±6.6 GtCO 2 -eq in 2019, about 12% higher than in 2010 and 54% higher than in 1990. By 2019, the largest growth in gross emissions occurred in CO2 from fossil fuels and industry followed by CH4, whereas the highest relative growth occurred in fluorinated gases, starting from low levels in 1990.  Regional contributions to global human-caused GHG emissions continue to differ widely. Historical contributions of CO2 emissions vary substantially across regions in terms of total magnitude, but also in terms of contributions to CO 2 -FFI and net CO2 -LULUCF emissions. Variations in regional and national per capita emissions partly reflect different development stages, but they also vary widely at similar income levels. Average per capita net anthropogenic GHG emissions in 2019 ranged from 2.6 tCO 2-eq to 19 tCO 2-eq across regions. Least Developed Countries and Small Island Developing States have much lower per capita emissions  than the global average, excluding CO2 -LULUCF. Around 48% of the global population in 2019 lives in countries emitting on average more than 6 tCO 2-eq per capita, 35% of the global population live in countries emitting more than 9 tCO2 -eq per capita while another 41% live in countries emitting less than 3 tCO 2 -eq per capita. A substantial share of the population in these low-emitting countries lack access to modern energy services.  Net GHG emissions have increased since 2010 across all major sectors. In 2019, approximately 34% of net global GHG emissions came from the energy sector, 24% from industry, 22% from AFOLU, 15% from transport and 6% from buildings . Average annual GHG emissions growth between 2010 and 2019 slowed compared to the previous decade in energy supply and industry but remained roughly constant at about 2% yr –1 in the transport sector . About half of total net AFOLU emissions are from CO2 LULUCF, predominantly from deforestation. Land overall constituted a net sink of –6.6 GtCO 2 yr–1 for the period 2010–201972.  Human-caused climate change is a consequence of more than a century of net GHG emissions from energy use, land-use and land use change, lifestyle and patterns of consumption, and production. Emissions reductions in CO2 from fossil fuels and industrial processes, due to improvements in energy intensity of GDP and carbon intensity of energy, have been less than emissions increases from rising global activity levels in industry, energy supply, transport, agriculture and buildings. The 10% of households with the highest per capita emissions contribute 34–45% of global consumption-based household GHG emissions, while the middle 40% contribute 40–53%, and the bottom 50% contribute 13–15%. An increasing share of emissions can be attributed to urban areas . The drivers of urban GHG emissions 73 are complex and include population size, income, state of urbanisation and urban form.
Observed Climate System Changes and Impacts to  Date It is unequivocal that human influence has warmed the atmosphere, ocean and land. Widespread and rapid changes in the atmosphere, ocean, cryosphere and biosphere have occurred . The scale of recent changes across the climate system as a whole and the present state of many aspects of the climate system are unprecedented over many centuries to many thousands of years. It is very likely that GHG emissions were the main driver of tropospheric warming and extremely likely that human-caused stratospheric ozone depletion was the main driver of stratospheric cooling between 1979 and the mid-1990s. It is virtually certain that the global upper ocean has warmed since the 1970s and extremely likely that human influence is the main driver. Ocean warming accounted for 91% of the heating in the climate system, with land warming, ice loss and atmospheric warming accounting for about 5%, 3% and 1%, respectively. Global mean sea level increased by 0.20 [0.15 to 0.25] m between 1901 and 2018. The average rate of sea level rise was 1.3 [0.6 to 2.1]mm yr-1 between 1901 and 1971, increasing to 1.9 [0.8 to 2.9] mm yr-1 between 1971 and 2006, and further increasing to 3.7 [3.2 to –4.2] mm yr -1 between 2006 and 2018. Human influence was very likely the main driver of these increases since at least 1971. Human influence is very likely the main driver of the global retreat of glaciers since the 1990s and the decrease in Arctic sea ice area between 1979–1988 and 2010–2019. Human influence has also very likely contributed to decreased Northern Hemisphere spring snow cover and surface melting of the Greenland ice sheet. It is virtually certain that human-caused CO2 emissions are the main driver of current global acidification of the surface open ocean.  Human-caused climate change is already affecting many weather and climate extremes in every region across the globe. Evidence of observed changes in extremes such as heatwaves, heavy precipitation, droughts, and tropical cyclones, and, in particular, their attribution to human influence, has strengthened since AR5. It is virtually certain that hot extremes have become more frequent and more intense across most land regions since the 1950s, while cold extremes have become less frequent and less severe, with high confidence that human-caused climate change is the main driver of these changes. Marine heatwaves have approximately doubled in frequency since the 1980s, and human influence has very likely contributed to most of them since at least 2006. The frequency and intensity of heavy precipitation events have increased since the 1950s over most land areas for which observational data are sufficient for trend analysis, and human-caused climate change is likely the main driver. Human-caused climate change has contributed to increases in agricultural and ecological droughts in some regions due to increased land evapotranspiration . It is likely that the global proportion of major tropical cyclone occurrence has increased over the last four decades.  Climate change has caused substantial damages, and increasingly irreversible losses, in terrestrial, freshwater, cryospheric and coastal and open ocean ecosystems. The extent and magnitude of climate change impacts are larger than estimated in previous assessments. Approximately half of the species assessed globally have shifted polewards or, on land, also to higher elevations. Biological responses including changes in geographic placement and shifting seasonal timing are often not sufficient to cope with recent climate change. Hundreds of local losses of species have been driven by increases in the magnitude of heat extremes and mass mortality events on land and in the ocean. Impacts on some ecosystems are approaching irreversibility such as the impacts of hydrological changes resulting from the retreat of glaciers, or the changes in some mountain and Arctic ecosystems driven by permafrost thaw. Impacts in ecosystems from slow-onset processes such as ocean acidification, sea level rise or regional decreases in precipitation have also been attributed to human-caused climate change. Climate change has contributed to desertification and exacerbated land degradation, particularly in low lying coastal areas, river deltas, drylands and in permafrost areas. Nearly 50% of coastal wetlands have been lost over the last 100 years, as a result of the combined effects of localised human pressures, sea level rise, warming and extreme climate events.  Climate change has reduced food security and affected water security due to warming, changing precipitation patterns, reduction and loss of cryospheric elements, and greater frequency and intensity of climatic extremes, thereby hindering efforts to meet Sustainable Development Goals. Although overall agricultural productivity has increased, climate change has slowed this growth in agricultural productivity over the past 50 years globally , with related negative crop yield impacts mainly recorded in mid- and low latitude regions, and some positive impacts in some high latitude regions. Ocean warming in the 20th century and beyond has contributed to an overall decrease in maximum catch potential, compounding the impacts from overfishing for some fish stocks. Ocean warming and ocean acidification have adversely affected food production from shellfish aquaculture and fisheries in some oceanic regions . Current levels of global warming are associated with moderate risks from increased dryland water scarcity. Roughly half of the world’s population currently experiences severe water scarcity for at least some part of the year due to a combination of climatic and non-climatic drivers. Unsustainable agricultural expansion, driven in part by unbalanced diets , increases ecosystem and human vulnerability and leads to competition for land and/or water resources. Increasing weather and climate extreme events have exposed millions of people to acute food insecurity and reduced water security, with the largest impacts observed in many locations and/or communities in Africa, Asia, Central and South America, LDCs, Small Islands and the Arctic, and for small-scale food producers, low-income households and Indigenous Peoples globally.  In urban settings, climate change has caused adverse impacts on human health, livelihoods and key infrastructure. Hot extremes including heatwaves have intensified in cities , where they have also worsened air pollution events and limited functioning of key infrastructure . Urban infrastructure, including transportation, water, sanitation and energy systems have been compromised by extreme and slow-onset events , with resulting economic losses, disruptions of services and impacts to well-being. Observed impacts are concentrated amongst economically and socially marginalised urban residents, e.g., those living in informal settlements. Cities intensify human-caused warming locally, while urbanisation also increases mean and heavy precipitation over and/or downwind of cities and resulting runoff intensity .  Climate change has adversely affected human physical health globally and mental health in assessed regions, and is contributing to humanitarian crises where climate hazards interact with high vulnerability. In all regions increases in extreme heat events have resulted in human mortality and morbidity . The occurrence of climate-related food-borne and water-borne diseases has increased. The incidence of vector-borne diseases has increased from range expansion and/or increased reproduction of disease vectors. Animal and human diseases, including zoonoses, are emerging in new areas . In assessed regions, some mental health challenges are associated with increasing temperatures, trauma from extreme events, and loss of livelihoods and culture . Climate change impacts on health are mediated through natural and human systems, including economic and social conditions and disruptions. Climate and weather extremes are increasingly driving displacement in Africa, Asia, North America, and Central and South America , with small island states in the Caribbean and South Pacific being disproportionately affected relative to their small population size. Through displacement and involuntary migration from extreme weather and climate events, climate change has generated and perpetuated vulnerability .  Human influence has likely increased the chance of compound extreme events since the 1950s. Concurrent and repeated climate hazards have occurred in all regions, increasing impacts and risks to health, ecosystems, infrastructure, livelihoods and food . Compound extreme events include increases in the frequency of concurrent heatwaves and droughts; fire weather in some regions; and compound flooding in some locations. Multiple risks interact, generating new sources of vulnerability to climate hazards, and compounding overall risk. Compound climate hazards can overwhelm adaptive capacity and substantially increase damage ).  Economic impacts attributable to climate change are increasingly affecting peoples’ livelihoods and are causing economic and societal impacts across national boundaries. Economic damages from climate change have been detected in climate-exposed sectors, with regional effects to agriculture, forestry, fishery, energy, and tourism, and through outdoor labour productivity with some exceptions of positive impacts in regions with low energy demand and comparative advantages in agricultural markets and tourism. Individual livelihoods have been affected through changes in agricultural productivity, impacts on human health and food security, destruction of homes and infrastructure, and loss of property and income, with adverse effects on gender and social equity . Tropical cyclones have reduced economic growth in the short-term. Event attribution studies and physical understanding indicate that human-caused climate change increases heavy precipitation associated with tropical cyclones. Wildfires in many regions have affected built assets, economic activity, and health. In cities and settlements, climate impacts to key infrastructure are leading to losses and damages across water and food systems, and affect economic activity, with impacts extending beyond the area directly impacted by the climate hazard.  Climate change has caused widespread adverse impacts and related losses and damages to nature and people . Losses and damages are unequally distributed across systems, regions and sectors. Cultural losses, related to tangible and intangible heritage, threaten adaptive capacity and may result in irrevocable losses of sense of belonging, valued cultural practices, identity and home, particularly for Indigenous Peoples and those more directly reliant on the environment for subsistence. For example, changes in snow cover, lake and river ice, and permafrost in many Arctic regions, are harming the livelihoods and cultural identity of Arctic residents including Indigenous populations. Infrastructure, including transportation, water, sanitation and energy systems have been compromised by extreme and slow-onset events, with resulting economic losses, disruptions of services and impacts to well-being.  Across sectors and regions, the most vulnerable people and systems have been disproportionately affected by the impacts of climate change. LDCs and SIDS who have much lower per capita emissions than the global average excluding CO2-LULUCF, also have high vulnerability to climatic hazards, with global hotspots of high human vulnerability observed in West-, Central- and East Africa, South Asia, Central and South America, SIDS and the Arctic. Regions and people with considerable development constraints have high vulnerability to climatic hazards. Vulnerability is higher in locations with poverty, governance challenges and limited access to basic services and resources, violent conflict and high levels of climate-sensitive livelihoods  . Vulnerability at different spatial levels is exacerbated by inequity and marginalisation linked to gender, ethnicity, low income or combinations thereof, especially for many Indigenous Peoples and local communities. Approximately 3.3 to 3.6 billion people live in contexts that are highly vulnerable to climate change. Between 2010 and 2020, human mortality from floods, droughts and storms was 15 times higher in highly vulnerable regions, compared to regions with very low vulnerability. In the Arctic and in some high mountain regions, negative impacts of cryosphere change have been especially felt among Indigenous Peoples. Human and ecosystem vulnerability are interdependent. Vulnerability of ecosystems and people to climate change differs substantially among and within regions, driven by patterns of intersecting socio-economic development, unsustainable ocean and land use, inequity, marginalisation, historical and ongoing patterns of inequity such as colonialism, and governance.
Equity and Inclusion in Climate Change Action  Actions that prioritise equity, climate justice, social justice and inclusion lead to more sustainable outcomes, co-benefits, reduce trade-offs, support transformative change and advance climate resilient development. Adaptation responses are immediately needed to reduce rising climate risks, especially for the most vulnerable. Equity, inclusion and just transitions are key to progress on adaptation and deeper societal ambitions for accelerated mitigation. Adaptation and mitigation actions, across scales, sectors and regions, that prioritise equity, climate justice, rights-based approaches, social justice and inclusivity, lead to more sustainable outcomes, reduce trade-offs, support transformative change and advance climate resilient development . Redistributive policies across sectors and regions that shield the poor and vulnerable, social safety nets, equity, inclusion and just transitions, at all scales can enable deeper societal ambitions and resolve trade-offs with sustainable development goals., particularly education, hunger, poverty, gender and energy access . Mitigation efforts embedded within the wider development context can increase the pace, depth and breadth of emission reductions . Equity, inclusion and just transitions at all scales enable deeper societal ambitions for accelerated mitigation, and climate action more broadly. The complexity in risk of rising food prices, reduced household incomes, and health and climate-related malnutrition  and mortality increases with little or low levels of adaptation.  Regions and people with considerable development constraints have high vulnerability to climatic hazards. Adaptation outcomes for the most vulnerable within and across countries and regions are enhanced through approaches focusing on equity, inclusivity, and rights-based approaches, including 3.3 to 3.6 billion people living in contexts that are highly vulnerable to climate change. Vulnerability is higher in locations with poverty, governance challenges and limited access to basic services and resources, violent conflict and high levels of climate-sensitive livelihoods  . Several risks can be moderated with adaptation. The largest adaptation gaps exist among lower income population groups and adaptation progress is unevenly distributed with observed adaptation gaps. Present development challenges causing high vulnerability are influenced by historical and ongoing patterns of inequity such as colonialism, especially for many Indigenous Peoples and local communities. Vulnerability is exacerbated by inequity and marginalisation linked to gender, ethnicity, low income or combinations thereof, especially for many Indigenous Peoples and local communities.  Meaningful participation and inclusive planning, informed by cultural values, Indigenous Knowledge, local knowledge, and scientific knowledge can help address adaptation gaps and avoid maladaptation. Such actions with flexible pathways may encourage low-regret and timely actions . Integrating climate adaptation into social protection programmes, including cash transfers and public works programmes, would increase resilience to climate change, especially when supported by basic services and infrastructure.  Equity, inclusion, just transitions, broad and meaningful participation of all relevant actors in decision making at all scales enable deeper societal ambitions for accelerated mitigation, and climate action more broadly, and build social trust, support transformative changes and an equitable sharing of benefits and burdens. Equity remains a central element in the UN climate regime, notwithstanding shifts in differentiation between states over time and challenges in assessing fair shares. Ambitious mitigation pathways imply large and sometimes disruptive changes in economic structure, with significant distributional consequences, within and between countries, including shifting of income and employment during the transition from high to low emissions activities. While some jobs may be lost, low-emissions development can also open up opportunities to enhance skills and create jobs. Broadening equitable access to finance, technologies and governance that facilitate mitigation, and consideration of climate justice can help equitable sharing of benefits and burdens, especially for vulnerable countries and communities.  Development priorities among countries also reflect different starting points and contexts, and enabling conditions for shifting development pathways towards increased sustainability will therefore differ, giving rise to different needs . Implementing just transition principles through collective and participatory decision-making processes is an effective way of integrating equity principles into policies at all scales depending on national circumstances, while in several countries just transition commissions, task forces and national policies have been established .  Many economic and regulatory instruments have been effective in reducing emissions and practical experience has informed instrument design to improve them while addressing distributional goals and social acceptance. The design of behavioural interventions, including the way that choices are presented to consumers work synergistically with price signals, making the combination more effective. Individuals with high socio-economic status contribute disproportionately to emissions, and have the highest potential for emissions reductions, e.g., as citizens, investors, consumers, role models, and professionals . There are options on design of instruments such as taxes, subsidies, prices, and consumption-based approaches, complemented by regulatory instruments to reduce high-emissions consumption while improving equity and societal well-being. Behaviour and lifestyle changes to help end-users adopt low-GHG-intensive options can be supported by policies, infrastructure and technology with multiple co-benefits for societal well-being. Broadening equitable access to domestic and international finance, technologies and capacity can also act as a catalyst for accelerating mitigation and shifting development pathways in low-income contexts . Eradicating extreme poverty, energy poverty, and providing decent living standards to all in these regions in the context of achieving sustainable development objectives, in the near term, can be achieved without significant global emissions growth. Technology development, transfer, capacity building and financing can support developing countries/ regions leapfrogging or transitioning to low-emissions transport systems thereby providing multiple co-benefits . Climate resilient development is advanced when actors work in equitable, just and enabling ways to reconcile divergent interests, values and worldviews, toward equitable and just outcomes .
Adaptation Actions to Date  Progress in adaptation planning and implementation has been observed across all sectors and regions, generating multiple benefits. The ambition, scope and progress on adaptation have risen among governments at the local, national and international levels, along with businesses, communities and civil society . Various tools, measures and processes are available that can enable, accelerate and sustain adaptation implementation . Growing public and political awareness of climate impacts and risks has resulted in at least 170 countries and many cities including adaptation in their climate policies and planning processes . Decision support tools and climate services are increasingly being used and pilot projects and local experiments are being implemented in different sectors .  Adaptation to water-related risks and impacts make up the majority of all documented adaptation. A large number of these adaptation responses are in the agriculture sector and these include on-farm water management, water storage, soil moisture conservation, and irrigation. Other adaptations in agriculture include cultivar improvements, agroforestry, community-based adaptation and farm and landscape diversification among others. For inland flooding, combinations of non-structural measures like early warning systems, enhancing natural water retention such as by restoring wetlands and rivers, and land use planning such as no build zones or upstream forest management, can reduce flood risk . Some land-related adaptation actions such as sustainable food production, improved and sustainable forest management, soil organic carbon management, ecosystem conservation and land restoration, reduced deforestation and degradation, and reduced food loss and waste are being undertaken, and can have mitigation co-benefits. Adaptation actions that increase the resilience of biodiversity and ecosystem services to climate change include responses like minimising additional stresses or disturbances, reducing fragmentation, increasing natural habitat extent, connectivity and heterogeneity, and protecting small-scale refugia where microclimate conditions can allow species to persist. Most innovations in urban adaptation have occurred through advances in disaster risk management, social safety nets and green/blue infrastructure. Many adaptation measures that benefit health and well-being are found in other sectors  .  Adaptation can generate multiple additional benefits such as improving agricultural productivity, innovation, health and well-being, food security, livelihood, and biodiversity conservation as well as reduction of risks and damages.  Globally tracked adaptation finance has shown an upward trend since AR5, but represents only a small portion of total climate finance, is uneven and has developed heterogeneously across regions and sectors. Adaptation finance has come predominantly from public sources, largely through grants, concessional and non-concessional instruments. Globally, private-sector financing of adaptation from a variety of sources such as commercial financial institutions, institutional investors, other private equity, non-financial corporations, as well as communities and households has been limited, especially in developing countries . Public mechanisms and finance can leverage private sector finance for adaptation by addressing real and perceived regulatory, cost and market barriers, for example via public-private partnerships. Innovations in adaptation and resilience finance, such as forecast-based/anticipatory financing systems and regional risk insurance pools, have been piloted and are growing in scale.  There are adaptation options which are effective in reducing climate risks 85 for specific contexts, sectors and regions and contribute positively to sustainable development and other societal goals. In the agriculture sector, cultivar improvements, on-farm water management and storage, soil moisture conservation, irrigation 86, agroforestry, community-based adaptation, and farm and landscape level diversification, and sustainable land management approaches, provide multiple benefits and reduce climate risks. Reduction of food loss and waste, and adaptation measures in support of balanced diets contribute to nutrition, health, and biodiversity benefits.  Ecosystem-based Adaptation 87 approaches such as urban greening, restoration of wetlands and upstream forest ecosystems reduce a range of climate change risks, including flood risks, urban heat and provide multiple co-benefits. Some land-based adaptation options provide immediate benefits ; while afforestation and reforestation, restoration of high-carbon ecosystems, agroforestry, and the reclamation of degraded soils take more time to deliver measurable results. Significant synergies exist between adaptation and mitigation, for example through sustainable land management approaches. Agroecological principles and practices and other approaches that work with natural processes support food security, nutrition, health and well-being, livelihoods and biodiversity, sustainability and ecosystem services.  Combinations of non-structural measures like early warning systems and structural measures like levees have reduced loss of lives in case of inland flooding and early warning systems along with flood-proofing of buildings have proven to be cost-effective in the context of coastal flooding under current sea level rise . Heat Health Action Plans that include early warning and response systems are effective adaptation options for extreme heat . Effective adaptation options for water, food and vector-borne diseases include improving access to potable water, reducing exposure of water and sanitation systems to extreme weather events, and improved early warning systems, surveillance, and vaccine development. Adaptation options such as disaster risk management, early warning systems, climate services and social safety nets have broad applicability across multiple sectors .  Integrated, multi-sectoral solutions that address social inequities, differentiate responses based on climate risk and cut across systems, increase the feasibility and effectiveness of adaptation in multiple sectors.
Adaptation Gaps and Barriers  Despite progress, adaptation gaps exist between current levels of adaptation and levels needed to respond to impacts and reduce climate risks. While progress in adaptation implementation is observed across all sectors and regions , many adaptation initiatives prioritise immediate and near-term climate risk reduction, e.g., through hard flood protection, which reduces the opportunity for transformational adaptation . Most observed adaptation is fragmented, small in scale, incremental, sector-specific, and focused more on planning rather than implementation. Further, observed adaptation is unequally distributed across regions and the largest adaptation gaps exist among lower population income groups. In the urban context, the largest adaptation gaps exist in projects that manage complex risks, for example in the food–energy–water–health nexus or the inter-relationships of air quality and climate risk. Many funding, knowledge and practice gaps remain for effective implementation, monitoring and evaluation and current adaptation efforts are not expected to meet existing goals. At current rates of adaptation planning and implementation the adaptation gap will continue to grow.  Soft and hard adaptation limits 100 have already been reached in some sectors and regions, in spite of adaptation having buffered some climate impacts. Ecosystems already reaching hard adaptation limits include some warm water coral reefs, some coastal wetlands, some rainforests, and some polar and mountain ecosystems. Individuals and households in low lying coastal areas in Australasia and Small Islands and smallholder farmers in Central and South America, Africa, Europe and Asia have reached soft limits, resulting from financial, governance, institutional and policy constraints and can be overcome by addressing these constraints. Transitioning from incremental to transformational adaptation can help overcome soft adaptation limits .  Adaptation does not prevent all losses and damages, even with effective adaptation and before reaching soft and hard limits. Losses and damages are unequally distributed across systems, regions and sectors and are not comprehensively addressed by current financial, governance and institutional arrangements, particularly in vulnerable developing countries.  There is increased evidence of maladaptation in various sectors and regions. Examples of maladaptation are observed in urban areas , agriculture , ecosystems (e.g. fire suppression in naturally
Lack of Finance as a Barrier to Climate Action  Insufficient financing, and a lack of political frameworks and incentives for finance, are key causes of the implementation gaps for both mitigation and adaptation. Financial flows remained heavily focused on mitigation, are uneven, and have developed heterogeneously across regions and sectors. In 2018, public and publicly mobilised private climate finance flows from developed to developing countries were below the collective goal under the UNFCCC and Paris Agreement to mobilise USD 100 billion per year by 2020 in the context of meaningful mitigation action and transparency on implementation . Public and private finance flows for fossil fuels are still greater than those for climate adaptation and mitigation . The overwhelming majority of tracked climate finance is directed towards mitigation. Nevertheless, average annual modelled investment requirements for 2020 to 2030 in scenarios that limit warming to 2°C or 1.5°C are a factor of three to six greater than current levels, and total mitigation investments would need to increase across all sectors and regions. Challenges remain for green bonds and similar products, in particular around integrity and additionality, as well as the limited applicability of these markets to many developing countries.  Current global financial flows for adaptation including from public and private finance sources, are insufficient for and constrain implementation of adaptation options, especially in developing countries. There are widening disparities between the estimated costs of adaptation and the documented finance allocated to adaptation. Adaptation finance needs are estimated to be higher than those assessed in AR5, and the enhanced mobilisation of and access to financial resources are essential for implementation of adaptation and to reduce adaptation gaps. Annual finance flows targeting adaptation for Africa, for example, are billions of USD less than the lowest adaptation cost estimates for near-term climate change. Adverse climate impacts can further reduce the availability of financial resources by causing losses and damages and impeding national economic growth, thereby further increasing financial constraints for adaptation particularly for developing countries and LDCs.  Without effective mitigation and adaptation, losses and damages will continue to disproportionately affect the poorest and most vulnerable populations. Accelerated financial support for developing countries from developed countries and other sources is a critical enabler to enhance mitigation action . Many developing countries lack comprehensive data at the scale needed and lack adequate financial resources needed for adaptation for reducing associated economic and non-economic losses and damages.  There are barriers to redirecting capital towards climate action both within and outside the global financial sector. These barriers include: the inadequate assessment of climate-related risks and investment opportunities, regional mismatch between available capital and investment needs, home bias factors, country indebtedness levels, economic vulnerability, and limited institutional capacities. Challenges from outside the financial sector include: limited local capital markets; unattractive risk-return profiles, in particular due to missing or weak regulatory environments that are inconsistent with ambition levels; limited institutional capacity to ensure safeguards; standardisation, aggregation, scalability and replicability of investment opportunities and financing models; and, a pipeline ready for commercial investments.
Global Policy Setting  The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, Kyoto Protocol, and Paris Agreement are supporting rising levels of national ambition and encouraging the development and implementation of climate policies at multiple levels of governance. The Kyoto Protocol led to reduced emissions in some countries and was instrumental in building national and international capacity for GHG reporting, accounting and emissions markets . The Paris Agreement, adopted under the UNFCCC, with near universal participation, has led to policy development and target-setting at national and sub-national levels, particularly in relation to mitigation but also for adaptation, as well as enhanced transparency of climate action and support. Nationally Determined Contributions, required under the Paris Agreement, have required countries to articulate their priorities and ambition with respect to climate action.  Loss & Damage was formally recognized in 2013 through establishment of the Warsaw International Mechanism on Loss and Damage, and in 2015, Article 8 of the Paris Agreement provided a legal basis for the WIM. There is improved understanding of both economic and non-economic losses and damages, which is informing international climate policy and which has highlighted that losses and damages are not comprehensively addressed by current financial, governance and institutional arrangements, particularly in vulnerable developing countries .  Other recent global agreements that influence responses to climate change include the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction , the finance-oriented Addis Ababa Action Agenda and the New Urban Agenda, and the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer , among others. In addition, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, adopted in 2015 by UN member states, sets out 17 Sustainable Development Goals and seeks to align efforts globally to prioritise ending extreme poverty, protect the planet and promote more peaceful, prosperous and inclusive societies. If achieved, these agreements would reduce climate change, and the impacts on health, well-being, migration, and conflict, among others .  Since AR5, rising public awareness and an increasing diversity of actors, have overall helped accelerate political commitment and global efforts to address climate change. Mass social movements have emerged as catalysing agents in some regions, often building on prior movements including Indigenous Peoples-led movements, youth movements, human rights movements, gender activism, and climate litigation, which is raising awareness and, in some cases, has influenced the outcome and ambition of climate governance. Engaging Indigenous Peoples and local communities using just-transition and rights-based decision-making approaches, implemented through collective and participatory decision-making processes has enabled deeper ambition and accelerated action in different ways, and at all scales, depending on national circumstances. The media helps shape the public discourse about climate change. This can usefully build public support to accelerate climate action . In some instances, public discourses of media and organised counter movements have impeded climate action, exacerbating helplessness and disinformation and fuelling polarisation, with negative implications for climate action .
Mitigation Actions to Date  There has been a consistent expansion of policies and laws addressing mitigation since AR5. Climate governance supports mitigation by providing frameworks through which diverse actors interact, and a basis for policy development and implementation. Many regulatory and economic instruments have already been deployed successfully. By 2020, laws primarily focussed on reducing GHG emissions existed in 56 countries covering 53% of global emissions. The application of diverse policy instruments for mitigation at the national and sub-national levels has grown consistently across a range of sectors. Policy coverage is uneven across sectors and remains limited for emissions from agriculture, and from industrial materials and feedstocks.  Practical experience has informed economic instrument design and helped to improve predictability, environmental effectiveness, economic efficiency, alignment with distributional goals, and social acceptance. Low-emission technological innovation is strengthened through the combination of technology-push policies, together with policies that create incentives for behaviour change and market opportunities. Comprehensive and consistent policy packages have been found to be more effective than single policies. Combining mitigation with policies to shift development pathways, policies that induce lifestyle or behaviour changes, for example, measures promoting walkable urban areas combined with electrification and renewable energy can create health co-benefits from cleaner air and enhanced active mobility . Climate governance enables mitigation by providing an overall direction, setting targets, mainstreaming climate action across policy domains and levels, based on national circumstances and in the context of international cooperation. Effective governance enhances regulatory certainty, creating specialised organisations and creating the context to mobilise finance. These functions can be promoted by climate-relevant laws, which are growing in number, or climate strategies, among others, based on national and sub-national context. Effective and equitable climate governance builds on engagement with civil society actors, political actors, businesses, youth, labour, media, Indigenous Peoples and local communities.  The unit costs of several low-emission technologies, including solar, wind and lithium-ion batteries, have fallen consistently since 2010. Design and process innovations in combination with the use of digital technologies have led to near-commercial availability of many low or zero emissions options in buildings, transport and industry. From 2010-2019, there have been sustained decreases in the unit costs of solar energy , wind energy, and lithium-ion batteries, and large increases in their deployment, e.g., >10× for solar and >100× for electric vehicles, albeit varying widely across regions. Electricity from PV and wind is now cheaper than electricity from fossil sources in many regions, electric vehicles are increasingly competitive with internal combustion engines, and large-scale battery storage on electricity grids is increasingly viable. In comparison to modular small-unit size technologies, the empirical record shows that multiple large-scale mitigation technologies, with fewer opportunities for learning, have seen minimal cost reductions and their adoption has grown slowly. Maintaining emission-intensive systems may, in some regions and sectors, be more expensive than transitioning to low emission systems.  For almost all basic materials – primary metals, building materials and chemicals – many low- to zero-GHG intensity production processes are at the pilot to near-commercial and in some cases commercial stage but they are not yet established industrial practice. Integrated design in construction and retrofit of buildings has led to increasing examples of zero energy or zero carbon buildings. Technological innovation made possible the widespread adoption of LED lighting. Digital technologies including sensors, the internet of things, robotics, and artificial intelligence can improve energy management in all sectors; they can increase energy efficiency, and promote the adoption of many low-emission technologies, including decentralised renewable energy, while creating economic opportunities. However, some of these climate change mitigation gains can be reduced or counterbalanced by growth in demand for goods and services due to the use of digital devices. Several mitigation options, notably solar energy, wind energy, electrification of urban systems, urban green infrastructure, energy efficiency, demand side management, improved forest- and crop/grassland management, and reduced food waste and loss, are technically viable, are becoming increasingly cost effective and are generally supported by the public, and this enables expanded deployment in many regions.  The magnitude of global climate finance flows has increased and financing channels have broadened. Annual tracked total financial flows for climate mitigation and adaptation increased by up to 60% between 2013/14 and 2019/20, but average growth has slowed since 2018 and most climate finance stays within national borders. Markets for green bonds, environmental, social and governance and sustainable finance products have expanded significantly since AR5 . Investors, central banks, and financial regulators are driving increased awareness of climate risk to support climate policy development and implementation. Accelerated international financial cooperation is a critical enabler of low-GHG and just transitions.  Economic instruments have been effective in reducing emissions, complemented by regulatory instruments mainly at the national and also sub-national and regional level. By 2020, over 20% of global GHG emissions were covered by carbon taxes or emissions trading systems, although coverage and prices have been insufficient to achieve deep reductions. Equity and distributional impacts of carbon pricing instruments can be addressed by using revenue from carbon taxes or emissions trading to support low-income households, among other approaches. The mix of policy instruments which reduced costs and stimulated adoption of solar energy, wind energy and lithium-ion batteries includes public R&D, funding for demonstration and pilot projects, and demand-pull instruments such as deployment subsidies to attain scale .  Mitigation actions, supported by policies, have contributed to a decrease in global energy and carbon intensity between 2010 and 2019, with a growing number of countries achieving absolute GHG emission reductions for more than a decade . While global net GHG emissions have increased since 2010, global energy intensity decreased by 2% yr –1 between 2010 and 2019. Global carbon intensity also decreased by 0.3% yr –1 , mainly due to fuel switching from coal to gas, reduced expansion of coal capacity, and increased use of renewables, and with large regional variations over the same period. In many countries, policies have enhanced energy efficiency, reduced rates of deforestation and accelerated technology deployment, leading to avoided and in some cases reduced or removed emissions. At least 18 countries have sustained production-based CO2 and GHG and consumption-based CO2 absolute emission reductions for longer than 10 years since 2005 through energy supply decarbonization, energy efficiency gains, and energy demand reduction, which resulted from both policies and changes in economic structure. Some countries have reduced production-based GHG emissions by a third or more since peaking, and some have achieved reduction rates of around 4% yr–1 for several years consecutively. Multiple lines of evidence suggest that mitigation policies have led to avoided global emissions of several GtCO 2-eq yr–1. At least 1.8 GtCO2-eq yr–1 of avoided emissions can be accounted for by aggregating separate estimates for the effects of economic and regulatory instruments. Growing numbers of laws and executive orders have impacted global emissions and are estimated to have resulted in 5.9 GtCO2 -eq yr–1 of avoided emissions in 2016. These reductions have only partly offset global emissions growth.
The Gap Between Mitigation Policies, Pledges and  Pathways that Limit Warming to 1.5°C or Below 2°C Global GHG emissions in 2030 associated with the implementation of NDCs announced prior to COP2691 would make it likely that warming will exceed 1.5°C during the 21st century and would make it harder to limit warming below 2°C – if no additional commitments are made or actions taken. A substantial ‘emissions gap’ exists as global GHG emissions in 2030 associated with the implementation of NDCs announced prior to COP26 would be similar to or only slightly below 2019 emission levels and higher than those associated with modelled mitigation pathways that limit warming to 1.5°C with no or limited overshoot or to 2°C, assuming immediate action, which implies deep, rapid, and sustained global GHG emission reductions this decade  . 92 The magnitude of the emissions gap depends on the global warming level considered and whether only unconditional or also conditional elements of NDCs 93 are considered . Modelled pathways that are consistent with NDCs announced prior to COP26 until 2030 and assume no increase in ambition thereafter have higher emissions, leading to a median global warming of 2.8 [2.1 to 3.4]°C by 2100 . If the ‘emission gap’ is not reduced, global GHG emissions in 2030 consistent with NDCs announced prior to COP26 make it likely that warming will exceed 1.5°C during the 21st century, while limiting warming to 2°C would imply an unprecedented acceleration of mitigation efforts during 2030–2050 .  Policies implemented by the end of 2020 are projected to result in higher global GHG emissions in 2030 than those implied by NDCs, indicating an ‘implementation gap 94 ’ . Projected global emissions implied by policies implemented by the end of 2020 are 57 GtCO2 -eq in 2030. This points to an implementation gap compared with the NDCs of 4 to 7 GtCO 2-eq in 2030; without a strengthening of policies, emissions are projected to rise, leading to a median global warming of 2.2°C to 3.5°C by 2100 .  Projected cumulative future CO2 emissions over the lifetime of existing fossil fuel infrastructure without additional abatement exceed the total cumulative net CO2 emissions in pathways that limit warming to 1.5°C with no or limited overshoot. They are approximately equal to total cumulative net CO2 emissions in pathways that limit warming to 2°C with a likelihood of 83% 96. Limiting warming to 2°C or lower will result in stranded assets. About 80% of coal, 50% of gas, and 30% of oil reserves cannot be burned and emitted if warming is limited to 2°C. Significantly more reserves are expected to remain unburned if warming is limited to 1.5°C.  Many countries have signalled an intention to achieve net zero GHG or net zero CO 2 emissions by around mid-century . More than 100 countries have either adopted, announced or are discussing net zero GHG or net zero CO 2 emissions commitments, covering more than two-thirds of global GHG emissions. A growing number of cities are setting climate targets, including net zero GHG targets. Many companies and institutions have also announced net zero emissions targets in recent years. The various net zero emission pledges differ across countries in terms of scope and specificity, and limited policies are to date in place to deliver on them.  All mitigation strategies face implementation challenges, including technology risks, scaling, and costs. Almost all mitigation options also face institutional barriers that need to be addressed to enable their application at scale . Current development pathways may create behavioural, spatial, economic and social barriers to accelerated mitigation at all scales. Choices made by policymakers, citizens, the private sector and other stakeholders influence societies’ development pathways. Structural factors of national circumstances and capabilities  affect the breadth and depth of climate governance. The extent to which civil society actors, political actors, businesses, youth, labour, media, Indigenous Peoples, and local communities are engaged influences political support for climate change mitigation and eventual policy outcomes.  The adoption of low-emission technologies lags in most developing countries, particularly least developed ones, due in part to weaker enabling conditions, including limited finance, technology development and transfer, and capacity . In many countries, especially those with limited institutional capacity, several adverse side-effects have been observed as a result of diffusion of low-emission technology, e.g., low-value employment, and dependency on foreign knowledge and suppliers. Low-emission innovation along with strengthened enabling conditions can reinforce development benefits, which can, in turn, create feedbacks towards greater public support for policy. Persistent and region-specific barriers also continue to hamper the economic and political feasibility of deploying AFOLU mitigation options. Barriers to implementation of AFOLU mitigation include insufficient institutional and financial support, uncertainty over long-term additionality and trade-offs, weak governance, insecure land ownership, low incomes and the lack of access to alternative sources of income, and the risk of reversal .
The Timing and Urgency of Climate Action  The magnitude and rate of climate change and associated risks depend strongly on near-term mitigation and adaptation actions . Global warming is more likely than not to reach 1.5°C between 2021 and 2040 even under the very low GHG emission scenarios, and likely or very likely to exceed 1.5°C under higher emissions scenarios 141. Many adaptation options have medium or high feasibility up to 1.5°C , but hard limits to adaptation have already been reached in some ecosystems and the effectiveness of adaptation to reduce climate risk will decrease with increasing warming. Societal choices and actions implemented in this decade determine the extent to which medium- and long-term pathways will deliver higher or lower climate resilient development. Climate resilient development prospects are increasingly limited if current greenhouse gas emissions do not rapidly decline, especially if 1.5°C global warming is exceeded in the near term. Without urgent, effective and equitable adaptation and mitigation actions, climate change increasingly threatens the health and livelihoods of people around the globe, ecosystem health, and biodiversity, with severe adverse consequences for current and future generations. .  In modelled pathways that limit warming to 1.5°C with no or limited overshoot and in those that limit warming to 2°C, assuming immediate actions, global GHG emissions are projected to peak in the early 2020s followed by rapid and deep GHG emissions reductions 142 . In pathways that limit warming to 1.5°C with no or limited overshoot, net global GHG emissions are projected to fall by 43 [34 to 60]%143 below 2019 levels by 2030, 60 [49 to 77]% by 2035, 69 [58 to 90]% by 2040 and 84 [73 to 98]% by 2050 144. Global modelled pathways that limit warming to 2°C have reductions in GHG emissions below 2019 levels of 21 [1 to 42]% by 2030, 35 [22 to 55] % by 2035, 46 [34 to 63] % by 2040 and 64 [53 to 77]% by 2050145. Global GHG emissions associated with NDCs announced prior to COP26 would make it likely that warming would exceed 1.5°C and limiting warming to 2°C would then imply a rapid acceleration of emission reductions during 2030–2050, around 70% faster than in pathways where immediate action is taken to limit warming to 2°C Continued investments in unabated high-emitting infrastructure and limited development and deployment of low-emitting alternatives prior to 2030 would act as barriers to this acceleration and increase feasibility risks.  All global modelled pathways that limit warming to 2°C or lower by 2100 involve reductions in both net CO 2 emissions and non-CO 2 emissions. For example, in pathways that limit warming to 1.5°C with no or limited overshoot, global CH4 emissions are reduced by 34 [21 to 57]% below 2019 levels by 2030 and by 44 [31 to 63]% in 2040. Global CH 4 emissions are reduced by 24 [9 to 53]% below 2019 levels by 2030 and by 37 [20 to 60]% in 2040 in modelled pathways that limit warming to 2°C with action starting in 2020.  All global modelled pathways that limit warming to 2°C or lower by 2100 involve GHG emission reductions in all sectors . The contributions of different sectors vary across modelled mitigation pathways. In most global modelled mitigation pathways, emissions from land-use, land-use change and forestry, via reforestation and reduced deforestation, and from the energy supply sector reach net zero CO2 emissions earlier than the buildings, industry and transport sectors. Strategies can rely on combinations of different options, but doing less in one sector needs to be compensated by further reductions in other sectors if warming is to be limited.  Without rapid, deep and sustained mitigation and accelerated adaptation actions, losses and damages will continue to increase, including projected adverse impacts in Africa, LDCs, SIDS, Central and South America , Asia and the Arctic, and will disproportionately affect the most vulnerable populations .  
Long-term Climate Change  The uncertainty range on assessed future changes in global surface temperature is narrower than in the AR5. For the first time in an IPCC assessment cycle, multi-model projections of global surface temperature, ocean warming and sea level are constrained using observations and the assessed climate sensitivity. The likely range of equilibrium climate sensitivity has been narrowed to 2.5°C to 4.0°C based on multiple lines of evidence , including improved understanding of cloud feedbacks. For related emissions scenarios, this leads to narrower uncertainty ranges for long-term projected global temperature change than in AR5.  Future warming depends on future GHG emissions, with cumulative net CO 2 dominating. The assessed best estimates and very likely ranges of warming for 2081-2100 with respect to 1850–1900 vary from 1.4 [1.0 to 1.8]°C in the very low GHG emissions scenario to 2.7 [2.1 to 3.5]°C in the intermediate GHG emissions scenario and 4.4 [3.3 to 5.7]°C in the very high GHG emissions scenario 113 .  Modelled pathways consistent with the continuation of policies implemented by the end of 2020 lead to global warming of 3.2 [2.2 to 3.5]°C by 2100 . Pathways of >4°C by 2100 would imply a reversal of current technology and/or mitigation policy trends . However, such warming could occur in emissions pathways consistent with policies implemented by the end of 2020 if climate sensitivity or carbon cycle feedbacks are higher than the best estimate.  Global warming will continue to increase in the near term in nearly all considered scenarios and modelled pathways. Deep, rapid, and sustained GHG emissions reductions, reaching net zero CO2 emissions and including strong emissions reductions of other GHGs, in particular CH4, are necessary to limit warming to 1.5°C or less than 2°C by the end of century . The best estimate of reaching 1.5°C of global warming lies in the first half of the 2030s in most of the considered scenarios and modelled pathways 114. In the very low GHG emissions scenario, CO 2 emissions reach net zero around 2050 and the best-estimate end-of-century warming is 1.4°C, after a temporary overshoot of no more than 0.1°C above 1.5°C global warming. Global warming of 2°C will be exceeded during the 21st century unless deep reductions in CO 2 and other GHG emissions occur in the coming decades. Deep, rapid, and sustained reductions in GHG emissions would lead to improvements in air quality within a few years, to reductions in trends of global surface temperature discernible after around 20 years, and over longer time periods for many other climate impact-drivers 115 . Targeted reductions of air pollutant emissions lead to more rapid improvements in air quality compared to reductions in GHG emissions only, but in the long term, further improvements are projected in scenarios that combine efforts to reduce air pollutants as well as GHG emissions 116 .   Changes in short-lived climate forcers resulting from the five considered scenarios lead to an additional net global warming in the near and long term. Simultaneous stringent climate change mitigation and air pollution control olicies limit this additional warming and lead to strong benefits for air quality. In high and very high GHG emissions scenarios, combined changes in SLCF emissions, such as CH 4, aerosol and ozone precursors, lead to a net global warming by 2100 of likely 0.4°C to 0.9°C relative to 2019. This is due to projected increases in atmospheric concentration of CH4, tropospheric ozone, hydrofluorocarbons and, when strong air pollution control is considered, reductions of cooling aerosols. In low and very low GHG emissions scenarios, air pollution control policies, reductions in CH 4 and other ozone precursors lead to a net cooling, whereas reductions in anthropogenic cooling aerosols lead to a net warming. Altogether, this causes a likely net warming of 0.0°C to 0.3°C due to SLCF changes in 2100 relative to 2019 and strong reductions in global surface ozone and particulate matter .  Continued GHG emissions will further affect all major climate system components, and many changes will be irreversible on centennial to millennial time scales. Many changes in the climate system become larger in direct relation to increasing global warming. With every additional increment of global warming, changes in extremes continue to become larger. Additional warming will lead to more frequent and intense marine heatwaves and is projected to further amplify permafrost thawing and loss of seasonal snow cover, glaciers, land ice and Arctic sea ice. Continued global warming is projected to further intensify the global water cycle, including its variability, global monsoon precipitation , and very wet and very dry weather and climate events and seasons. The portion of global land experiencing detectable changes in seasonal mean precipitation is projected to increase with more variable precipitation and surface water flows over most land regions within seasons and from year to year . Many changes due to past and future GHG emissions are irreversible on centennial to millennial time scales, especially in the ocean, ice sheets and global sea level. Ocean acidification , ocean deoxygenation and global mean sea level will continue to increase in the 21st century, at rates dependent on future emissions.  With further global warming, every region is projected to increasingly experience concurrent and multiple changes in climatic impact-drivers. Increases in hot and decreases in cold climatic impact-drivers, such as temperature extremes, are projected in all regions. At 1.5°C global warming, heavy precipitation and flooding events are projected to intensify and become more frequent in most regions in Africa, Asia , North America and Europe . At 2°C or above, these changes expand to more regions and/or become more significant, and more frequent and/or severe agricultural and ecological droughts are projected in Europe, Africa, Australasia and North, Central and South America . Other projected regional changes include intensification of tropical cyclones and/or extratropical storms , and increases in aridity and fire weather . Compound heatwaves and droughts become likely more frequent, including concurrently at multiple locations.