Atmosphere  Each of the last three decades has been successively warmer at the Earth’s surface than any preceding decade since 1850. The period from 1983 to 2012 was very likely the warmest 30-year period of the last 800 years in the Northern Hemisphere, where such assessment is possible and likely the warmest 30-year period of the last 1400 years.  The globally averaged combined land and ocean surface temperature data as calculated by a linear trend show a warming of 0.85 [0.65 to 1.06] °C20 over the period 1880 to 2012, for which multiple independently produced datasets exist. The total increase between the average of the 1850–1900 period and the 2003–2012 period is 0.78 [0.72 to 0.85] °C, based on the single longest dataset available. For the longest period when calculation of regional trends is sufficiently complete, almost the entire globe has experienced surface warming.  In addition to robust multi-decadal warming, the globally averaged surface temperature exhibits substantial decadal and interannual variability. Due to this natural variability, trends based on short records are very sensitive to the beginning and end dates and do not in general reflect long-term climate trends. As one example, the rate of warming over the past 15 years , which begins with a strong El Niño, is smaller than the rate calculated since 1951 .  Based on multiple independent analyses of measurements, it is virtually certain that globally the troposphere has warmed and the lower stratosphere has cooled since the mid-20th century. There is medium confidence in the rate of change and its vertical structure in the Northern Hemisphere extratropical troposphere.  Confidence in precipitation change averaged over global land areas since 1901 is low prior to 1951 and medium afterwards. Averaged over the mid-latitude land areas of the Northern Hemisphere, precipitation has likely increased since 1901 . For other latitudes area-averaged long-term positive or negative trends have low confidence.
Ocean  Ocean warming dominates the increase in energy stored in the climate system, accounting for more than 90% of the energy accumulated between 1971 and 2010 with only about 1% stored in the atmosphere. On a global scale, the ocean warming is largest near the surface, and the upper 75 m warmed by 0.11 [0.09 to 0.13] °C per decade over the period 1971 to 2010. It is virtually certain that the upper ocean warmed from 1971 to 2010, and it likely warmed between the 1870s and 1971. It is likely that the ocean warmed from 700 to 2000 m from 1957 to 2009 and from 3000 m to the bottom for the period 1992 to 2005.  It is very likely that regions of high surface salinity, where evaporation dominates, have become more saline, while regions of low salinity, where precipitation dominates, have become fresher since the 1950s. These regional trends in ocean salinity provide indirect evidence for changes in evaporation and precipitation over the oceans and thus for changes in the global water cycle. There is no observational evidence of a long-term trend in the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation.  Since the beginning of the industrial era, oceanic uptake of CO2 has resulted in acidification of the ocean; the pH of ocean surface water has decreased by 0.1, corresponding to a 26% increase in acidity, measured as hydrogen ion concentration. There is medium confidence that, in parallel to warming, oxygen concentrations have decreased in coastal waters and in the open ocean thermocline in many ocean regions since the 1960s, with a likely expansion of tropical oxygen minimum zones in recent decades.
Cryosphere  Over the last two decades, the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets have been losing mass. Glaciers have continued to shrink almost worldwide. Northern Hemisphere spring snow cover has continued to decrease in extent. There is high confidence that there are strong regional differences in the trend in Antarctic sea ice extent, with a very likely increase in total extent.  Glaciers have lost mass and contributed to sea level rise throughout the 20th century. The rate of ice mass loss from the Greenland ice sheet has very likely substantially increased over the period 1992 to 2011, resulting in a larger mass loss over 2002 to 2011 than over 1992 to 2011. The rate of ice mass loss from the Antarctic ice sheet, mainly from the northern Antarctic Peninsula and the Amundsen Sea sector of West Antarctica, is also likely larger over 2002 to 2011.  The annual mean Arctic sea ice extent decreased over the period 1979 to 2012. The rate of decrease was very likely in the range 3.5 to 4.1% per decade. Arctic sea ice extent has decreased in every season and in every successive decade since 1979, with the most rapid decrease in decadal mean extent in summer . For the summer sea ice minimum, the decrease was very likely in the range of 9.4 to 13.6% per decade  . It is very likely that the annual mean Antarctic sea ice extent increased in the range of 1.2 to 1.8% per decade between 1979 and 2012. However, there is high confidence that there are strong regional differences in Antarctica, with extent increasing in some regions and decreasing in others.  There is very high confidence that the extent of Northern Hemisphere snow cover has decreased since the mid-20th century by 1.6 [0.8 to 2.4] % per decade for March and April, and 11.7% per decade for June, over the 1967 to 2012 period. There is high confidence that permafrost temperatures have increased in most regions of the Northern Hemisphere since the early 1980s, with reductions in thickness and areal extent in some regions. The increase in permafrost temperatures has occurred in response to increased surface temperature and changing snow cover.
Sea level  Over the period 1901–2010, global mean sea level rose by 0.19 [0.17 to 0.21] m. The rate of sea level rise since the mid-19th century has been larger than the mean rate during the previous two millennia.  It is very likely that the mean rate of global averaged sea level rise was 1.7 [1.5 to 1.9] mm/yr between 1901 and 2010 and 3.2 [2.8 to 3.6] mm/yr between 1993 and 2010. Tide gauge and satellite altimeter data are consistent regarding the higher rate during the latter period. It is likely that similarly high rates occurred between 1920 and 1950.  Since the early 1970s, glacier mass loss and ocean thermal expansion from warming together explain about 75% of the observed global mean sea level rise. Over the period 1993–2010, global mean sea level rise is, with high confidence, consistent with the sum of the observed contributions from ocean thermal expansion, due to warming, from changes in glaciers, the Greenland ice sheet, the Antarctic ice sheet and land water storage.  Rates of sea level rise over broad regions can be several times larger or smaller than the global mean sea level rise for periods of several decades, due to fluctuations in ocean circulation. Since 1993, the regional rates for the Western Pacific are up to three times larger than the global mean, while those for much of the Eastern Pacific are near zero or negative.  There is very high confidence that maximum global mean sea level during the last interglacial period was, for several thousand years, at least 5 m higher than present and high confidence that it did not exceed 10 m above present. During the last interglacial period, the Greenland ice sheet very likely contributed between 1.4 and 4.3 m to the higher global mean sea level, implying with medium confidence an additional contribution from the Antarctic ice sheet. This change in sea level occurred in the context of different orbital forcing and with high-latitude surface temperature, averaged over several thousand years, at least 2°C warmer than present .
Natural and anthropogenic radiative forcings  Atmospheric concentrations of GHGs are at levels that are unprecedented in at least 800, years. Concentrations of carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide have all shown large increases since 1750  . CO2 concentrations are increasing at the fastest observed decadal rate of change for 2002– 2011. After almost one decade of stable CH4 concentrations since the late 1990s, atmospheric measurements have shown renewed increases since 2007. N2O concentrations have steadily increased at a rate of 0.73 ± 0.03 ppb/yr over the last three decades.  The total anthropogenic radiative forcing over 1750–2011 is calculated to be a warming effect of 2.3 [1.1 to 3.3] W/m , and it has increased more rapidly since 1970 than during prior decades. Carbon dioxide is the largest single contributor to radiative forcing over 1750–2011 and its trend since 1970. The total anthropogenic radiative forcing estimate for 2011 is substantially higher than the estimate reported in the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report for the year 2005. This is caused by a combination of continued growth in most GHG concentrations and an improved estimate of radiative forcing from aerosols.  The radiative forcing from aerosols, which includes cloud adjustments, is better understood and indicates a weaker cooling effect than in AR4. The aerosol radiative forcing over 1750–2011 is estimated as –0.9 [–1.9 to −0.1] W/m . Radiative forcing from aerosols has two competing components: a dominant cooling effect from most aerosols and their cloud adjustments and a partially offsetting warming contribution from black carbon absorption of solar radiation. There is high confidence that the global mean total aerosol radiative forcing has counteracted a substantial portion of radiative forcing from wellmixed GHGs. Aerosols continue to contribute the largest uncertainty to the total radiative forcing estimate.  Changes in solar irradiance and volcanic aerosols cause natural radiative forcing. The radiative forcing from stratospheric volcanic aerosols can have a large cooling effect on the climate system for some years after major volcanic eruptions. Changes in total solar irradiance are calculated to have contributed only around 2% of the total radiative forcing in 2011, relative to 1750.
Human activities affecting emission drivers  About half of the cumulative anthropogenic CO2 emissions between 1750 and 2011 have occurred in the last 40 years . Cumulative anthropogenic CO2 emissions of 2040 ± 310 GtCO2 were added to the atmosphere between 1750 and 2011. Since 1970, cumulative CO2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion, cement production and flaring have tripled, and cumulative CO2 emissions from forestry and other land use22 have increased by about 40% 23. In 2011, annual CO2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion, cement production and flaring were 34.8 ± 2.9 GtCO2/yr. For 2002–2011, average annual emissions from FOLU were 3.3 ± 2.9 GtCO2/yr.  About 40% of these anthropogenic CO2 emissions have remained in the atmosphere since 1750. The rest was removed from the atmosphere by sinks, and stored in natural carbon cycle reservoirs. Sinks from ocean uptake and vegetation with soils account, in roughly equal measures, for the remainder of the cumulative CO2 emissions. The ocean has absorbed about 30% of the emitted anthropogenic CO2, causing ocean acidification.  Total annual anthropogenic GHG emissions have continued to increase over 1970 to 2010 with larger absolute increases between 2000 and 2010. Despite a growing number of climate change mitigation policies, annual GHG emissions grew on average by 1.0 GtCO2-eq per year, from 2000 to 2010, compared to 0.4 GtCO2-eq per year, from 1970 to 2000 24. Total anthropogenic GHG emissions from 2000 to 2010 were the highest in human history and reached 49 GtCO2-eq/yr in 2010. The global economic crisis of 2007/2008 reduced emissions only temporarily.  CO2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion and industrial processes contributed about 78% to the total GHG emission increase between 1970 and 2010, with a contribution of similar percentage over the 2000–2010 period. Fossil-fuel-related CO2 emissions reached 32 GtCO2/yr, in 2010, and grew further by about 3% between 2010 and 2011, and by about 1 to 2% between 2011 and 2012. CO2 remains the major anthropogenic GHG, accounting for 76% of total anthropogenic GHG emissions in 2010. Of the total, 16% comes from CH4, 6.2% from N2O, and 2.0% from fluorinated gases 25. Annually, since 1970, about 25% of anthropogenic GHG emissions have been in the form of non-CO2 gases.  Total annual anthropogenic GHG emissions have increased by about 10 GtCO2-eq between 2000 and 2010. This increase directly came from the energy, industry, transport and building sectors. Accounting for indirect emissions raises the contributions by the building and industry sectors. Since 2000, GHG emissions have been growing in all sectors, except in agriculture, forestry and other land use 22. In 2010, 35% of GHG emissions were released by the energy sector, 24% from AFOLU, 21% by industry, 14% by transport and 6.4% by the building sector. When emissions from electricity and heat production are attributed to the sectors that use the final energy, the shares of the industry and building sectors in global GHG emissions are increased to 31% and 19%, respectively.  See also Box 3.2 for contributions from various sectors, based on metrics other than 100-year Global Warming Potential. Globally, economic and population growth continue to be the most important drivers of increases in CO2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion. The contribution of population growth between 2000 and 2010 remained roughly identical to that of the previous three decades, while the contribution of economic growth has risen sharply. Between 2000 and 2010, both drivers outpaced emission reductions from improvements in energy intensity of gross domestic product. Increased use of coal relative to other energy sources has reversed the long-standing trend in gradual decarbonization  of the world’s energy supply.
Attribution of climate  changes and impacts The evidence for human influence on the climate system has grown since AR4. Human influence has been detected in warming of the atmosphere and the ocean, in changes in the global water cycle, in reductions in snow and ice, and in global mean sea level rise; and it is extremely likely to have been the dominant cause of the observed warming since the mid20th century. In recent decades, changes in climate have caused impacts on natural and human systems on all continents and across the oceans. Impacts are due to observed climate change, irrespective of its cause, indicating the sensitivity of natural and human systems to changing climate. The causes of observed changes in the climate system, as well as in any natural or human system impacted by climate, are established following a consistent set of methods. Detection addresses the question of whether climate or a natural or human system affected by climate has actually changed in a statistical sense, while attribution evaluates the relative contributions of multiple causal factors to an observed change or event with an assignment of statistical confidence. Attribution of climate change to causes quantifies the links between observed climate change and human activity, as well as other, natural, climate drivers. In contrast, attribution of observed impacts to climate change considers the links between observed changes in natural or human systems and observed climate change, regardless of its cause. Results from studies attributing climate change to causes provide estimates of the magnitude of warming in response to changes in radiative forcing and hence support projections of future climate change. Results from studies attributing impacts to climate change provide strong indications for the sensitivity of natural or human systems to future climate change.
Observed impacts attributed to climate change  In recent decades, changes in climate have caused impacts on natural and human systems on all continents and across the oceans. Impacts are due to observed climate change, irrespective of its cause, indicating the sensitivity of natural and human systems to changing climate. Evidence of observed climate change impacts is strongest and most comprehensive for natural systems. Some impacts on human systems have also been attributed to climate change, with a major or minor contribution of climate change distinguishable from other influences. Impacts on human systems are often geographically heterogeneous because they depend not only on changes in climate variables but also on social and economic factors. Hence, the changes are more easily observed at local levels, while attribution can remain difficult.  In many regions, changing precipitation or melting snow and ice are altering hydrological systems, affecting water resources in terms of quantity and quality. Glaciers continue to shrink almost worldwide due to climate change , affecting runoff and water resources downstream . Climate change is causing permafrost warming and thawing in high-latitude regions and in high-elevation regions .  Many terrestrial, freshwater and marine species have shifted their geographic ranges, seasonal activities, migration patterns, abundances and species interactions in response to ongoing climate change. While only a few recent species extinctions have been attributed as yet to climate change , natural global climate change at rates slower than current anthropogenic climate change caused significant ecosystem shifts and species extinctions during the past millions of years. Increased tree mortality, observed in many places worldwide, has been attributed to climate change in some regions. Increases in the frequency or intensity of ecosystem disturbances such as droughts, windstorms, fires and pest outbreaks have been detected in many parts of the world and in some cases are attributed to climate change . Numerous observations over the last decades in all ocean basins show changes in abundance, distribution shifts poleward and/ or to deeper, cooler waters for marine fishes, invertebrates and phytoplankton, and altered ecosystem composition , tracking climate trends. Some warm-water corals and their reefs have responded to warming with species replacement, bleaching, and decreased coral cover causing habitat loss . Some impacts of ocean acidification on marine organisms have been attributed to human influence, from the thinning of pteropod and foraminiferan shells to the declining growth rates of corals. Oxygen minimum zones are progressively expanding in the tropical Pacific, Atlantic and Indian Oceans, due to reduced ventilation and O2 solubility in warmer, more stratified oceans, and are constraining fish habitat.  Assessment of many studies covering a wide range of regions and crops shows that negative impacts of climate change on crop yields have been more common than positive impacts . The smaller number of studies showing positive impacts relate mainly to high-latitude regions, though it is not yet clear whether the balance of impacts has been negative or positive in these regions. Climate change has negatively affected wheat and maize yields for many regions and in the global aggregate. Effects on rice and soybean yield have been smaller in major production regions and globally, with a median change of zero across all available data which are fewer for soy compared to the other crops. Observed impacts relate mainly to production aspects of food security rather than access or other components of food security. Since AR4, several periods of rapid food and cereal price increases following climate extremes in key producing regions indicate a sensitivity of current markets to climate extremes among other factors .  At present the worldwide burden of human ill-health from climate change is relatively small compared with effects of other stressors and is not well quantified. However, there has been increased heat-related mortality and decreased cold-related mortality in some regions as a result of warming. Local changes in temperature and rainfall have altered the distribution of some water-borne illnesses and disease vectors.  ‘Cascading’ impacts of climate change can now be attributed along chains of evidence from physical climate through to intermediate systems and then to people. The changes in climate feeding into the cascade, in some cases, are linked to human drivers , while, in other cases, assessments of the causes of observed climate change leading into the cascade are not available. In all cases, confidence in detection and attribution to observed climate change decreases for effects further down each impact chain.
Extreme events  Changes in many extreme weather and climate events have been observed since about 1950. Some of these changes have been linked to human influences, including a decrease in cold temperature extremes, an increase in warm temperature extremes, an increase in extreme high sea levels and an increase in the number of heavy precipitation events in a number of regions. It is very likely that the number of cold days and nights has decreased and the number of warm days and nights has increased on the global scale. It is likely that the frequency of heat waves has increased in large parts of Europe, Asia and Australia. It is very likely that human influence has contributed to the observed global scale changes in the frequency and intensity of daily temperature extremes since the mid-20th century. It is likely that human influence has more than doubled the probability of occurrence of heat waves in some locations.  There is medium confidence that the observed warming has increased heat-related human mortality and decreased coldrelated human mortality in some regions. Extreme heat events currently result in increases in mortality and morbidity in North America , and in Europe with impacts that vary according to people’s age, location and socio-economic factors.  There are likely more land regions where the number of heavy precipitation events has increased than where it has decreased. The frequency and intensity of heavy precipitation events has likely increased in North America and Europe. In other continents, confidence in trends is at most medium. It is very likely that global near-surface and tropospheric air specific humidity has increased since the 1970s. In land regions where observational coverage is sufficient for assessment, there is medium confidence that anthropogenic forcing has contributed to a global-scale intensification of heavy precipitation over the second half of the 20th century.  There is low confidence that anthropogenic climate change has affected the frequency and magnitude of fluvial floods on a global scale. The strength of the evidence is limited mainly by a lack of long-term records from unmanaged catchments. Moreover, floods are strongly influenced by many human activities impacting catchments, making the attribution of detected changes to climate change difficult. However, recent detection of increasing trends in extreme precipitation and discharges in some catchments implies greater risks of flooding on a regional scale. Costs related to flood damage, worldwide, have been increasing since the 1970s, although this is partly due to the increasing exposure of people and assets.  There is low confidence in observed global-scale trends in droughts, due to lack of direct observations, dependencies of inferred trends on the choice of the definition for drought, and due to geographical inconsistencies in drought trends. There is also low confidence in the attribution of changes in drought over global land areas since the mid-20th century, due to the same observational uncertainties and difficulties in distinguishing decadal scale variability in drought from long-term trends.  There is low confidence that long-term changes in tropical cyclone activity are robust, and there is low confidence in the attribution of global changes to any particular cause. However, it is virtually certain that intense tropical cyclone activity has increased in the North Atlantic since 1970.  It is likely that extreme sea levels  have increased since 1970, being mainly the result of mean sea level rise. Due to a shortage of studies and the difficulty of distinguishing any such impacts from other modifications to coastal systems, limited evidence is available on the impacts of sea level rise.  Impacts from recent climate-related extremes, such as heat waves, droughts, floods, cyclones and wildfires, reveal significant vulnerability and exposure of some ecosystems and many human systems to current climate variability . Impacts of such climate-related extremes include alteration of ecosystems, disruption of food production and water supply, damage to infrastructure and settlements, human morbidity and mortality and consequences for mental health and human well-being. For countries at all levels of development, these impacts are consistent with a significant lack of preparedness for current climate variability in some sectors.  Direct and insured losses from weather-related disasters have increased substantially in recent decades, both globally and regionally. Increasing exposure of people and economic assets has been the major cause of long-term increases in economic losses from weather- and climate-related disasters.