Foundations of decision-making  about climate change Effective decision-making to limit climate change and its effects can be informed by a wide range of analytical approaches for evaluating expected risks and benefits, recognizing the importance of governance, ethical dimensions, equity, value judgments, economic assessments and diverse perceptions and responses to risk and uncertainty. Sustainable development and equity provide a basis for assessing climate policies. Limiting the effects of climate change is necessary to achieve sustainable development and equity, including poverty eradication. Countries’ past and future contributions to the accumulation of GHGs in the atmosphere are different, and countries also face varying challenges and circumstances and have different capacities to address mitigation and adaptation. Mitigation and adaptation raise issues of equity, justice and fairness and are necessary to achieve sustainable development and poverty eradication. Many of those most vulnerable to climate change have contributed and contribute little to GHG emissions. Delaying mitigation shifts burdens from the present to the future, and insufficient adaptation responses to emerging impacts are already eroding the basis for sustainable development. Both adaptation and mitigation can have distributional effects locally, nationally and internationally, depending on who pays and who benefits. The process of decision-making about climate change, and the degree to which it respects the rights and views of all those affected, is also a concern of justice.  Effective mitigation will not be achieved if individual agents advance their own interests independently. Climate change has the characteristics of a collective action problem at the global scale, because most GHGs accumulate over time and mix globally, and emissions by any agent affect other agents. Cooperative responses, including international cooperation, are therefore required to effectively mitigate GHG emissions and address other climate change issues. The effectiveness of adaptation can be enhanced through complementary actions across levels, including international cooperation. The evidence suggests that outcomes seen as equitable can lead to more effective cooperation.  Decision-making about climate change involves valuation and mediation among diverse values and may be aided by the analytic methods of several normative disciplines. Ethics analyses the different values involved and the relations between them. Recent political philosophy has investigated the question of responsibility for the effects of emissions. Economics and decision analysis provide quantitative methods of valuation which can be used for estimating the social cost of carbon, in cost–benefit and costeffectiveness analyses, for optimization in integrated models and elsewhere. Economic methods can reflect ethical principles, and take account of non-marketed goods, equity, behavioural biases, ancillary benefits and costs and the differing values of money to different people. They are, however, subject to well-documented limitations.  Analytical methods of valuation cannot identify a single best balance between mitigation, adaptation and residual climate impacts. Important reasons for this are that climate change involves extremely complex natural and social processes, there is extensive disagreement about the values concerned, and climate change impacts and mitigation approaches have important distributional effects. Nevertheless, information on the consequences of emissions pathways to alternative climate goals and risk levels can be a useful input into decision-making processes. Evaluating responses to climate change involves assessment of the widest possible range of impacts, including low-probability outcomes with large consequences.  Effective decision-making and risk management in the complex environment of climate change may be iterative: strategies can often be adjusted as new information and understanding develops during implementation. However, adaptation and mitigation choices in the near term will affect the risks of climate change throughout the 21st century and beyond, and prospects for climate-resilient pathways for sustainable development depend on what is achieved through mitigation. Opportunities to take advantage of positive synergies between adaptation and mitigation may decrease with time, particularly if mitigation is delayed too long. Decision-making about climate change is influenced by how individuals and organizations perceive risks and uncertainties and take them into account. They sometimes use simplified decision rules, overestimate or underestimate risks and are biased towards the status quo. They differ in their degree of risk aversion and the relative importance placed on near-term versus long-term ramifications of specific actions. Formalized analytical methods for decision-making under uncertainty can account accurately for risk, and focus attention on both short- and long-term consequences.
Interaction among mitigation, adaptation  and sustainable development Climate change is a threat to equitable and sustainable development. Adaptation, mitigation and sustainable development are closely related, with potential for synergies and trade-offs. Climate change poses an increasing threat to equitable and sustainable development. Some climate-related impacts on development are already being observed. Climate change is a threat multiplier. It exacerbates other threats to social and natural systems, placing additional burdens particularly on the poor and constraining possible development paths for all. Development along current global pathways can contribute to climate risk and vulnerability, further eroding the basis for sustainable development.  Aligning climate policy with sustainable development requires attention to both adaptation and mitigation. Interaction among adaptation, mitigation and sustainable development occurs both within and across regions and scales, often in the context of multiple stressors. Some options for responding to climate change could impose risks of other environmental and social costs, have adverse distributional effects and draw resources away from other development priorities, including poverty eradication.  Both adaptation and mitigation can bring substantial co-benefits . Examples of actions with co-benefits include improved air quality; enhanced energy security, reduced energy and water consumption in urban areas through greening cities and recycling water; sustainable agriculture and forestry; and protection of ecosystems for carbon storage and other ecosystem services.  Strategies and actions can be pursued now that will move towards climate-resilient pathways for sustainable development, while at the same time helping to improve livelihoods, social and economic well-being and effective environmental management. Prospects for climate-resilient pathways are related fundamentally to what the world accomplishes with climate change mitigation. Since mitigation reduces the rate as well as the magnitude of warming, it also increases the time available for adaptation to a particular level of climate change, potentially by several decades. Delaying mitigation actions may reduce options for climate-resilient pathways in the future.
Climate change risks reduced by  adaptation and mitigation Without additional mitigation efforts beyond those in place today, and even with adaptation, warming by the end of the 21st century will lead to high to very high risk of severe, widespread and irreversible impacts globally. Mitigation involves some level of co-benefits and of risks due to adverse side effects, but these risks do not involve the same possibility of severe, widespread and irreversible impacts as risks from climate change, increasing the benefits from near-term mitigation efforts. The risks of climate change, adaptation and mitigation differ in nature, timescale, magnitude and persistence. Risks from adaptation include maladaptation and negative ancillary impacts. Risks from mitigation include possible adverse side effects of large-scale deployment of low-carbon technology options and economic costs. Climate change risks may persist for millennia and can involve very high risk of severe impacts and the presence of significant irreversibilities combined with limited adaptive capacity. In contrast, the stringency of climate policies can be adjusted much more quickly in response to observed consequences and costs and create lower risks of irreversible consequences.  Mitigation and adaptation are complementary approaches for reducing risks of climate change impacts. They interact with one another and reduce risks over different timescales . Benefits from adaptation can already be realized in addressing current risks and can be realized in the future for addressing emerging risks. Adaptation has the potential to reduce climate change impacts over the next few decades, while mitigation has relatively little influence on climate outcomes over this timescale. Near-term and longerterm mitigation and adaptation, as well as development pathways, will determine the risks of climate change beyond mid-century. The potential for adaptation differs across sectors and will be limited by institutional and capacity constraints, increasing the long-term benefits of mitigation. The level of mitigation will influence the rate and magnitude of climate change, and greater rates and magnitude of climate change increase the likelihood of exceeding adaptation limits.  Without additional mitigation efforts beyond those in place today, and even with adaptation, warming by the end of the 21st century will lead to high to very high risk of severe, widespread and irreversible impacts globally . Estimates of warming in 2100 without additional climate mitigation efforts are from 3.7°C to 4.8°C compared with pre-industrial levels; the range is 2.5°C to 7.8°C when using the 5th to 95th percentile range of the median climate response. The risks associated with temperatures at or above 4°C include severe and widespread impacts on unique and threatened systems, substantial species extinction, large risks to global and regional food security, consequential constraints on common human activities, increased likelihood of triggering tipping points  and limited potential for adaptation in some cases . Some risks of climate change, such as risks to unique and threatened systems and risks associated with extreme weather events, are moderate to high at temperatures 1°C to 2°C above pre-industrial levels.  Substantial cuts in GHG emissions over the next few decades can substantially reduce risks of climate change by limiting warming in the second half of the 21st century and beyond . Global mean surface warming is largely determined by cumulative emissions, which are, in turn, linked to emissions over different timescales. Limiting risks across Reasons For Concern would imply a limit for cumulative emissions of CO2. Such a limit would require that global net emissions of CO2 eventually decrease to zero. Reducing risks of climate change through mitigation would involve substantial cuts in GHG emissions over the next few decades. But some risks from residual damages are unavoidable, even with mitigation and adaptation. A subset of relevant climate change risks has been estimated using aggregate economic indicators. Such economic estimates have important limitations and are therefore a useful but insufficient basis for decision-making on long-term mitigation targets.  Mitigation involves some level of co-benefits and risks, but these risks do not involve the same possibility of severe, widespread and irreversible impacts as risks from climate change . Scenarios that are likely to limit warming to below 2°C or even 3°C compared with pre-industrial temperatures involve large-scale changes in energy systems and potentially land use over the coming decades. Associated risks include those linked to large-scale deployment of technology options for producing low-carbon energy, the potential for high aggregate economic costs of mitigation and impacts on vulnerable countries and industries. Other risks and co-benefits are associated with human health, food security, energy security, poverty reduction, biodiversity conservation, water availability, income distribution, efficiency of taxation systems, labour supply and employment, urban sprawl, fossil fuel export revenues and the economic growth of developing countries.  Inertia in the economic and climate systems and the possibility of irreversible impacts from climate change increase the benefits of near-term mitigation efforts. The actions taken today affect the options available in the future to reduce emissions, limit temperature change and adapt to climate change. Near-term choices can create, amplify or limit significant elements of lock-in that are important for decision-making. Lock-ins and irreversibilities occur in the climate system due to large inertia in some of its components such as heat transfer from the ocean surface to depth leading to continued ocean warming for centuries regardless of emission scenario and the irreversibility of a large fraction of anthropogenic climate change resulting from CO2 emissions on a multi-century to millennial timescale unless CO2 were to be removed from the atmosphere through large-scale human interventions over a sustained period . Irreversibilities in socio-economic and biological systems also result from infrastructure development and long-lived products and from climate change impacts, such as species extinction. The larger potential for irreversibility and pervasive impacts from climate change risks than from mitigation risks increases the benefit of shortterm mitigation efforts. Delays in additional mitigation or constraints on technological options limit the mitigation options and increase the long-term mitigation costs as well as other risks that would be incurred in the medium to long term to hold climate change impacts at a given level.
Trade-offs, synergies and integrated responses  There are many opportunities to link mitigation, adaptation and the pursuit of other societal objectives through integrated responses. Successful implementation relies on relevant tools, suitable governance structures and enhanced capacity to respond. A growing evidence base indicates close links between adaptation and mitigation, their co-benefits and adverse side effects, and recognizes sustainable development as the overarching context for climate policy . Developing tools to address these linkages is critical to the success of climate policy in the context of sustainable development. This section presents examples of integrated responses in specific policy arenas, as well as some of the factors that promote or impede policies aimed at multiple objectives. Increasing efforts to mitigate and adapt to climate change imply an increasing complexity of interactions, encompassing connections among human health, water, energy, land use and biodiversity. Mitigation can support the achievement of other societal goals, such as those related to human health, food security, environmental quality, energy access, livelihoods and sustainable development, although there can also be negative effects. Adaptation measures also have the potential to deliver mitigation co-benefits, and vice versa, and support other societal goals, though trade-offs can also arise.  Integration of adaptation and mitigation into planning and decision-making can create synergies with sustainable development. Synergies and trade-offs among mitigation and adaptation policies and policies advancing other societal goals can be substantial, although sometimes difficult to quantify especially in welfare terms. A multi-objective approach to policy-making can help manage these synergies and trade-offs. Policies advancing multiple goals may also attract greater support.  Effective integrated responses depend on suitable tools and governance structures, as well as adequate capacity . Managing trade-offs and synergies is challenging and requires tools to help understand interactions and support decision-making at local and regional scales. Integrated responses also depend on governance that enables coordination across scales and sectors, supported by appropriate institutions. Developing and implementing suitable tools and governance structures often requires upgrading the human and institutional capacity to design and deploy integrated responses.  An integrated approach to energy planning and implementation that explicitly assesses the potential for co-benefits and the presence of adverse side effects can capture complementarities across multiple climate, social and environmental objectives . There are strong interactive effects across various energy policy objectives, such as energy security, air quality, health and energy access and between a range of social and environmental objectives and climate mitigation objectives . An integrated approach can be assisted by tools such as cost-benefit analysis, cost-effectiveness analysis, multi-criteria analysis and expected utility theory. It also requires appropriate coordinating institutions.  Explicit consideration of interactions among water, food, energy and biological carbon sequestration plays an important role in supporting effective decisions for climate resilient pathways . Both biofuel-based power generation and large-scale afforestation designed to mitigate climate change can reduce catchment run-off, which may conflict with alternative water uses for food production, human consumption or the maintenance of ecosystem function and services. Conversely, irrigation can increase the climate resilience of food and fibre production but reduces water availability for other uses.  An integrated response to urbanization provides substantial opportunities for enhanced resilience, reduced emissions and more sustainable development. Urban areas account for more than half of global primary energy use and energy-related CO2 emissions and contain a high proportion of the population and economic activities at risk from climate change. In rapidly growing and urbanizing regions, mitigation strategies based on spatial planning and efficient infrastructure supply can avoid the lock-in of high emission patterns. Mixed-use zoning, transport-oriented development, increased density and co-located jobs and homes can reduce direct and indirect energy use across sectors. Compact development of urban spaces and intelligent densification can preserve land carbon stocks and land for agriculture and bioenergy. Reduced energy and water consumption in urban areas through greening cities and recycling water are examples of mitigation actions with adaptation benefits. Building resilient infrastructure systems can reduce vulnerability of urban settlements and cities to coastal flooding, sea level rise and other climate-induced stresses.
Future risks and impacts caused  by a changing climate Climate change will amplify existing risks and create new risks for natural and human systems. Risks are unevenly distributed and are generally greater for disadvantaged people and communities in countries at all levels of development. Increasing magnitudes of warming increase the likelihood of severe, pervasive and irreversible impacts for people, species and ecosystems. Continued high emissions would lead to mostly negative impacts for biodiversity, ecosystem services and economic development and amplify risks for livelihoods and for food and human security. Risk of climate-related impacts results from the interaction of climate-related hazards with the vulnerability and exposure of human and natural systems, including their ability to adapt. Rising rates and magnitudes of warming and other changes in the climate system, accompanied by ocean acidification, increase the risk of severe, pervasive, and in some cases, irreversible detrimental impacts. Future climate change will amplify existing climate-related risks and create new risks.  Key risks are potentially severe impacts relevant to understanding dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system. Risks are considered key due to high hazard or high vulnerability of societies and systems exposed, or both. Their identification is based on large magnitude or high probability of impacts; irreversibility or timing of impacts; persistent vulnerability or exposure; or limited potential to reduce risks. Some risks are particularly relevant for individual regions, while others are global. For risk assessment it is important to evaluate the widest possible range of impacts, including low-probability outcomes with large consequences. Risk levels often increase with temperature and are sometimes more directly linked to other dimensions of climate change, such as the rate of warming, as well as the magnitudes and rates of ocean acidification and sea level rise .  Key risks that span sectors and regions include the following : 1. Risk of severe ill-health and disrupted livelihoods resulting from storm surges, sea level rise and coastal flooding; inland flooding in some urban regions; and periods of extreme heat. 2. Systemic risks due to extreme weather events leading to breakdown of infrastructure networks and critical services. 3. Risk of food and water insecurity and loss of rural livelihoods and income, particularly for poorer populations. 4. Risk of loss of ecosystems, biodiversity and ecosystem goods, functions and services. The overall risks of future climate change impacts can be reduced by limiting the rate and magnitude of climate change, including ocean acidification. Some risks are considerable even at 1°C global mean temperature increase above pre-industrial levels. Many global risks are high to very high for global temperature increases of 4°C or more. These risks include severe and widespread impacts on unique and threatened systems, the extinction of many species, large risks to food security and compromised normal human activities, including growing food or working outdoors in some areas for parts of the year, due to the combination of high temperature and humidity. The precise levels of climate change sufficient to trigger abrupt and irreversible change remain uncertain, but the risk associated with crossing such thresholds in the earth system or in interlinked human and natural systems increases with rising temperature.  Adaptation can substantially reduce the risks of climate change impacts, but greater rates and magnitude of climate change increase the likelihood of exceeding adaptation limits . The potential for adaptation, as well as constraints and limits to adaptation, varies among sectors, regions, communities and ecosystems. The scope for adaptation changes over time and is closely linked to socio-economic development pathways and circumstances. See Figure 2.4 and Table 2.3, along with Topics 3 and 4.
Characteristics of mitigation pathways  There are multiple mitigation pathways that are likely to limit warming to below 2°C relative to pre-industrial levels. These pathways would require substantial emissions reductions over the next few decades and near zero emissions of CO2 and other long-lived greenhouse gases by the end of the century. Implementing such reductions poses substantial technological, economic, social and institutional challenges, which increase with delays in additional mitigation and if key technologies are not available. Limiting warming to lower or higher levels involves similar challenges but on different timescales. Without additional efforts to reduce GHG emissions beyond those in place today, global emission growth is expected to persist driven by growth in global population and economic activities. Global GHG emissions under most scenarios without additional mitigation  are between about 75 GtCO2-eq/yr and almost 140 GtCO2-eq/yr in 21003520which is approximately between the 2100 emission levels in the RCP6.0 and RCP8.5 pathways 3621 . Baseline scenarios exceed 450 ppm CO2-eq by 2030 and reach CO2-eq concentration levels between about 750 ppm CO2-eq and more than 1300 ppm CO2-eq by 2100. Global mean surface temperature increases in 2100 range from about 3.7°C to 4.8°C above the average for 1850–1900 for a median climate response. They range from 2.5°C to 7.8°C when including climate uncertainty 3722 . The future scenarios do not account for possible changes in natural forcings in the climate system.  Many different combinations of technological, behavioural and policy options can be used to reduce emissions and limit temperature change. To evaluate possible pathways to long-term climate goals, about 900 mitigation scenarios were collected for this assessment, each of which describes different technological, socio-economic and institutional changes. Emission reductions under these scenarios lead to concentrations in 2100 from 430 ppm CO2-eq to above 720 ppm CO2-eq which is comparable to the 2100 forcing levels between RCP2.6 and RCP6.0. Scenarios with concentration levels of below 430 ppm CO2-eq by 2100 were also assessed.  Scenarios leading to CO2-eq concentrations in 2100 of about 450 ppm or lower are likely to maintain warming below 2°C over the 21st century relative to pre-industrial levels. Mitigation scenarios reaching concentration levels of about 500 ppm CO2-eq by 2100 are more likely than not to limit warming to less than 2°C relative to pre-industrial levels, unless concentration levels temporarily exceed roughly 530 ppm CO2-eq before 2100. In this case, warming is about as likely as not to remain below 2°C relative to pre-industrial levels. Scenarios that exceed about 650 ppm CO2-eq by 2100 are unlikely to limit warming to below 2°C relative to pre-industrial levels. Mitigation scenarios in which warming is more likely than not to be less than 1.5°C relative to pre-industrial levels by 2100 are characterized by concentration levels by 2100 of below 430 ppm CO2-eq. In these scenarios, temperature peaks during the century and subsequently declines.  Mitigation scenarios reaching about 450 ppm CO2-eq in 2100  typically involve temporary overshootof atmospheric concentrations, as do many scenarios reaching about 500 ppm CO2-eq to about 550 ppm CO2-eq by 2100. Depending on the level of overshoot, overshoot scenarios typically rely on the availability and widespread deployment of bioenergy with carbon dioxide capture and storage and afforestation in the second half of the century. The availability and scale of these and other Carbon Dioxide Removal technologies and methods are uncertain, and CDR technologies and methods are, to varying degrees, associated with challenges and risks 3924 . CDR is also prevalent in many scenarios without overshoot to compensate for residual emissions from sectors where mitigation is more expensive.  Limiting warming with a likely chance to less than 2°C relative to pre-industrial levels would require substantial cuts in anthropogenic GHG emissions by mid-century through largescale changes in energy systems and possibly land use. Limiting warming to higher levels would require similar changes but less quickly. Limiting warming to lower levels would require these changes more quickly. Scenarios that are likely to maintain warming at below 2°C are characterized by a 40 to 70% reduction in GHG emissions by 2050, relative to 2010 levels, and emissions levels near zero or below in 2100. Scenarios with higher emissions in 2050 are characterized by a greater reliance on CDR technologies beyond mid-century, and vice versa. Scenarios that are likely to maintain warming at below 2°C include more rapid improvements in energy efficiency and a tripling to nearly a quadrupling of the share of zero- and low-carbon energy supply from renewable energy, nuclear energy and fossil energy with carbon dioxide capture and storage or BECCS by the year 2050. The scenarios describe a wide range of changes in land use, reflecting different assumptions about the scale of bioenergy production, afforestation and reduced deforestation. Scenarios leading to concentrations of 500 ppm CO2-eq by 2100 are characterized by a 25 to 55% reduction in GHG emissions by 2050, relative to 2010 levels. Scenarios that are likely to limit warming to 3°C relative to pre-industrial levels reduce emissions less rapidly than those limiting warming to 2°C. Only a limited number of studies provide scenarios that are more likely than not to limit warming to 1.5°C by 2100; these scenarios are characterized by concentrations below 430 ppm CO2-eq by 2100 and 2050 emission reduction between 70 and 95% below 2010. For a comprehensive overview of the characteristics of emissions scenarios, their CO2-equivalent concentrations and their likelihood to keep warming to below a range of temperature levels, see Table 3.1.  Reducing emissions of non-CO2 climate forcing agents can be an important element of mitigation strategies. Emissions of nonCO2 gases, nitrous oxide, and fluorinated gases) contributed about 27% to the total emissions of Kyoto gases in 2010. For most non-CO2 gases, near-term, low-cost options are available to reduce their emissions. However, some sources of these non-CO2 gases are difficult to mitigate, such as N2O emissions from fertilizer use and CH4 emissions from livestock. As a result, emissions of most non-CO2 gases will not be reduced to zero, even under stringent mitigation scenarios. The differences in radiative properties and lifetimes of CO2 and non-CO2 climate forcing agents have important implications for mitigation strategies.  All current GHG emissions and other climate forcing agents affect the rate and magnitude of climate change over the next few decades. Reducing the emissions of certain short-lived climate forcing agents can reduce the rate of warming in the short term but will have only a limited effect on long-term warming, which is driven mainly by CO2 emissions. There are large uncertainties related to the climate impacts of some of the short-lived climate forcing agents. Although the effects of CH4 emissions are well understood, there are large uncertainties related to the effects of black carbon. Co-emitted components with cooling effects may further complicate and reduce the climate impacts of emission reductions. Reducing emissions of sulfur dioxide would cause warming. Near-term reductions in short-lived climate forcing agents can have a relatively fast impact on climate change and possible co-benefits for air pollution.  Delaying additional mitigation to 2030 will substantially increase the challenges associated with limiting warming over the 21st century to below 2°C relative to pre-industrial levels. GHG emissions in 2030 lie between about 30 GtCO2-eq/yr and 50 GtCO2-eq/yr in cost-effective scenarios that are likely to about as likely as not to limit warming to less than 2°C this century relative to pre-industrial levels  . Scenarios with GHG emission levels of above 55 GtCO2-eq/yr require substantially higher rates of emissions reductions between 2030 and 2050 ; much more rapid scale-up of zero and low-carbon energy over this period ; a larger reliance on CDR technologies in the long term; and higher transitional and long-term economic impacts.  Estimated global emission levels by 2020 based on the Cancún Pledges are not consistent with cost-effective long-term mitigation trajectories that are at least about as likely as not to limit warming to below 2°C relative to pre-industrial levels , but they do not preclude the option to meet this goal . The Cancún Pledges are broadly consistent with cost-effective scenarios that are likely to limit temperature change to below 3°C relative to pre-industrial levels.  Estimates of the aggregate economic costs of mitigation vary widely depending on methodologies and assumptions but increase with the stringency of mitigation. Scenarios in which all countries of the world begin mitigation immediately, in which there is a single global carbon price, and in which all key technologies are available have been used as a cost-effective benchmark for estimating macroeconomic mitigation costs. Under these assumptions, mitigation scenarios that are likely to limit warming to below 2°C through the 21st century relative to pre-industrial levels entail losses in global consumption—not including benefits of reduced climate change as well as co-benefits and adverse side effects of mitigation —of 1 to 4% in 2030, 2 to 6% in 2050, and 3% to 11% in 2100, relative to consumption in baseline scenarios that grows anywhere from 300% to more than 900% over the century . These numbers correspond to an annualized reduction of consumption growth by 0.04 to 0.14 percentage points over the century relative to annualized consumption growth in the baseline that is between 1.6% and 3% per year. In the absence or under limited availability of mitigation technologies , mitigation costs can increase substantially depending on the technology considered . Delaying additional mitigation reduces near-term costs but increases mitigation costs in the medium- to long-term. Many models could not limit likely warming to below 2°C over the 21st century relative to pre-industrial levels, if additional mitigation is considerably delayed, or if availability of key technologies, such as bioenergy, CCS and their combination are limited .  Mitigation efforts and associated cost are expected to vary across countries. The distribution of costs can differ from the distribution of the actions themselves. In globally cost-effective scenarios, the majority of mitigation efforts takes place in countries with the highest future GHG emissions in baseline scenarios. Some studies exploring particular effort-sharing frameworks, under the assumption of a global carbon market, have estimated substantial global financial flows associated with mitigation in scenarios that are likely to more unlikely than likely to limit warming during the 21st century to less than 2°C relative to pre-industrial levels.
Climate system responses  Climate system properties that determine the response to external forcing have been estimated both from climate models and from analysis of past and recent climate change. The equilibrium climate sensitivity 3325is likely in the range 1.5°C to 4.5°C, extremely unlikely less than 1°C, and very unlikely greater than 6°C.  Cumulative emissions of CO2 largely determine global mean surface warming by the late 21st century and beyond. Multiple lines of evidence indicate a strong and consistent near-linear relationship across all scenarios considered between net cumulative CO2 emissions  and projected global temperature change to the year 2100. Past emissions and observed warming support this relationship within uncertainties. Any given level of warming is associated with a range of cumulative CO2 emissions , and therefore, for example, higher emissions in earlier decades imply lower emissions later.  The global mean peak surface temperature change per trillion tonnes of carbon emitted as CO2 is likely in the range of 0.8°C to 2.5°C. This quantity, called the transient climate response to cumulative carbon emissions, is supported by both modelling and observational evidence and applies to cumulative emissions up to about 2000 GtC.  Warming caused by CO2 emissions is effectively irreversible over multi-century timescales unless measures are taken to remove CO2 from the atmosphere. Ensuring CO2-induced warming remains likely less than 2°C requires cumulative CO2 emissions from all anthropogenic sources to remain below about 3650 GtCO2, over half of which were already emitted by 2011.  Multi-model results show that limiting total human-induced warming to less than 2°C relative to the period 1861–1880 with a probability of >66% would require total CO2 emissions from all anthropogenic sources since 1870 to be limited to about 2900 GtCO2 when accounting for non-CO2 forcing as in the RCP2.6 scenario, with a range of 2550 to 3150 GtCO2 arising from variations in non-CO2 climate drivers across the scenarios considered by WGIII. About 1900 [1650 to 2150] GtCO2 were emitted by 2011, leaving about 1000 GtCO2 to be consistent with this temperature goal. Estimated total fossil carbon reserves exceed this remaining amount by a factor of 4 to 7, with resources much larger still.
Characteristics of adaptation pathways  Adaptation can reduce the risks of climate change impacts, but there are limits to its effectiveness, especially with greater magnitudes and rates of climate change. Taking a longer-term perspective, in the context of sustainable development, increases the likelihood that more immediate adaptation actions will also enhance future options and preparedness. Adaptation can contribute to the well-being of current and future populations, the security of assets and the maintenance of ecosystem goods, functions and services now and in the future. Adaptation is place- and context-specific, with no single approach for reducing risks appropriate across all settings . Effective risk reduction and adaptation strategies consider vulnerability and exposure and their linkages with socio-economic processes, sustainable development, and climate change. Adaptation research since the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report has evolved from a dominant consideration of engineering and technological adaptation pathways to include more ecosystem-based, institutional and social measures. A previous focus on cost–benefit analysis, optimization and efficiency approaches has broadened with the development of multi-metric evaluations that include risk and uncertainty dimensions integrated within wider policy and ethical frameworks to assess tradeoffs and constraints. The range of specific adaptation measures has also expanded, as have the links to sustainable development. There are many studies on local and sectoral adaptation costs and benefits, but few global analyses and very low confidence in their results.  Adaptation planning and implementation at all levels of governance are contingent on societal values, objectives and risk perceptions. Recognition of diverse interests, circumstances, social-cultural contexts and expectations can benefit decision-making processes. Indigenous, local and traditional knowledge systems and practices, including indigenous peoples’ holistic view of community and environment, are a major resource for adapting to climate change, but these have not been used consistently in existing adaptation efforts. Integrating such forms of knowledge into practices increases the effectiveness of adaptation as do effective decision support, engagement and policy processes.  Adaptation planning and implementation can be enhanced through complementary actions across levels, from individuals to governments. National governments can coordinate adaptation efforts of local and sub-national governments, for example by protecting vulnerable groups, by supporting economic diversification and by providing information, policy and legal frameworks and financial support. Local government and the private sector are increasingly recognized as critical to progress in adaptation, given their roles in scaling up adaptation of communities, households and civil society and in managing risk information and financing.  A first step towards adaptation to future climate change is reducing vulnerability and exposure to present climate variability, but some near-term responses to climate change may also limit future choices. Integration of adaptation into planning, including policy design, and decision-making can promote synergies with development and disaster risk reduction. However, poor planning or implementation, overemphasizing short-term outcomes or failing to sufficiently anticipate consequences can result in maladaptation, increasing the vulnerability or exposure of the target group in the future or the vulnerability of other people, places or sectors. For example, enhanced protection of exposed assets can lock in dependence on further protection measures. Appropriate adaptation options can be better assessed by including co-benefits and mitigation implications.  Numerous interacting constraints can impede adaptation planning and implementation. Common constraints on implementation arise from the following: limited financial and human resources; limited integration or coordination of governance; uncertainties about projected impacts; different perceptions of risks; competing values; absence of key adaptation leaders and advocates; and limited tools to monitor adaptation effectiveness. Other constraints include insufficient research, monitoring and observation and the financial and other resources to maintain them. Underestimating the complexity of adaptation as a social process can create unrealistic expectations about achieving intended adaptation outcomes .  Greater rates and magnitude of climate change increase the likelihood of exceeding adaptation limits. Limits to adaptation occur when adaptive actions to avoid intolerable risks for an actor’s objectives or for the needs of a system are not possible or are not currently available. Value-based judgments of what constitutes an intolerable risk may differ. Limits to adaptation emerge from the interaction among climate change and biophysical and/or socio-economic constraints. Opportunities to take advantage of positive synergies between adaptation and mitigation may decrease with time, particularly if limits to adaptation are exceeded. In some parts of the world, insufficient responses to emerging impacts are already eroding the basis for sustainable development. For most regions and sectors, empirical evidence is not sufficient to quantify magnitudes of climate change that would constitute a future adaptation limit. Furthermore, economic development, technology and cultural norms and values can change over time to enhance or reduce the capacity of systems to avoid limits. As a consequence, some limits are ‘soft’ in that they may be alleviated over time. Other limits are ‘hard’ in that there are no reasonable prospects for avoiding intolerable risks.  Transformations in economic, social, technological and political decisions and actions can enhance adaptation and promote sustainable development. Restricting adaptation responses to incremental changes to existing systems and structures without considering transformational change may increase costs and losses and miss opportunities. For example, enhancing infrastructure to protect other built assets can be expensive and ultimately not defray increasing costs and risks, whereas options such as relocation or using ecosystem services to adapt may provide a range of benefits now and in the future. Transformational adaptation can include introduction of new technologies or practices, formation of new financial structures or systems of governance, adaptation at greater scales or magnitudes and shifts in the location of activities. Planning and implementation of transformational adaptation could reflect strengthened, altered or aligned paradigms and consequently may place new and increased demands on governance structures to reconcile different goals and visions for the future and to address possible equity and ethical implications: transformational adaptation pathways are enhanced by iterative learning, deliberative processes, and innovation. At the national level, transformation is considered most effective when it reflects a country’s own visions and approaches to achieving sustainable development in accordance with its national circumstances and priorities.  Building adaptive capacity is crucial for effective selection and implementation of adaptation options . Successful adaptation requires not only identifying adaptation options and assessing their costs and benefits, but also increasing the adaptive capacity of human and natural systems . This can involve complex governance challenges and new institutions and institutional arrangements.  Significant co-benefits, synergies and trade-offs exist between mitigation and adaptation and among different adaptation responses; interactions occur both within and across regions . Increasing efforts to mitigate and adapt to climate change imply an increasing complexity of interactions, particularly at the intersections among water, energy, land use and biodiversity, but tools to understand and manage these interactions remain limited. Examples of actions with co-benefits include improved energy efficiency and cleaner energy sources, leading to reduced emissions of health-damaging, climate-altering air pollutants; reduced energy and water consumption in urban areas through greening cities and recycling water; sustainable agriculture and forestry; and protection of ecosystems for carbon storage and other ecosystem services.
Mitigation  There has been a considerable increase in national and subnational mitigation plans and strategies since AR4. In 2012, 67% of global GHG emissions were subject to national legislation or strategies versus 45% in 2007. However, there has not yet been a substantial deviation in global emissions from the past trend. These plans and strategies are in their early stages of development and implementation in many countries, making it difficult to assess their aggregate impact on future global emissions.  Since AR4, there has been an increased focus on policies designed to integrate multiple objectives, increase co-benefits and reduce adverse side effects. Governments often explicitly reference co-benefits in climate and sectoral plans and strategies.  Sector-specific policies have been more widely used than economy-wide policies . Although most economic theory suggests that economy-wide policies for mitigation would be more cost-effective than sector-specific policies, administrative and political barriers may make economy-wide policies harder to design and implement than sector-specific policies. The latter may be better suited to address barriers or market failures specific to certain sectors and may be bundled in packages of complementary policies  In principle, mechanisms that set a carbon price, including cap and trade systems and carbon taxes, can achieve mitigation in a cost-effective way, but have been implemented with diverse effects due in part to national circumstances as well as policy design. The short-run environmental effects of cap and trade systems have been limited as a result of loose caps or caps that have not proved to be constraining. In some countries, tax-based policies specifically aimed at reducing GHG emissions—alongside technology and other policies—have helped to weaken the link between GHG emissions and gross domestic product . In addition, in a large group of countries, fuel taxes have had effects that are akin to sectoral carbon taxes . Revenues from carbon taxes or auctioned emission allowances are used in some countries to reduce other taxes and/or to provide transfers to low-income groups. This illustrates the general principle that mitigation policies that raise government revenue generally have lower social costs than approaches which do not.  Economic instruments in the form of subsidies may be applied across sectors, and include a variety of policy designs, such as tax rebates or exemptions, grants, loans and credit lines. An increasing number and variety of RE policies including subsidies—motivated by many factors—have driven escalated growth of RE technologies in recent years. Government policies play a crucial role in accelerating the deployment of RE technologies. Energy access and social and economic development have been the primary drivers in most developing countries whereas secure energy supply and environmental concerns have been most important in developed countries. The focus of policies is broadening from a concentration primarily on RE electricity to include RE heating and cooling and transportation.  The reduction of subsidies for GHG-related activities in various sectors can achieve emission reductions, depending on the social and economic context. While subsidies can affect emissions in many sectors, most of the recent literature has focused on subsidies for fossil fuels. Since AR4 a small but growing literature based on economy-wide models has projected that complete removal of subsidies to fossil fuels in all countries could result in reductions in global aggregate emissions by mid-century . Studies vary in methodology, the type and definition of subsidies and the time frame for phase out considered. In particular, the studies assess the impacts of complete removal of all fossil fuel subsides without seeking to assess which subsidies are wasteful and inefficient, keeping in mind national circumstances.  Regulatory approaches and information measures are widely used and are often environmentally effective . Examples of regulatory approaches include energy efficiency standards; examples of information programmes include labelling programmes that can help consumers make better-informed decisions.  Mitigation policy could devalue fossil fuel assets and reduce revenues for fossil fuel exporters, but differences between regions and fuels exist. Most mitigation scenarios are associated with reduced revenues from coal and oil trade for major exporters. The effect on natural gas export revenues is more uncertain. The availability of CCS would reduce the adverse effect of mitigation on the value of fossil fuel assets.  Interactions between or among mitigation policies may be synergistic or may have no additive effect on reducing emissions . For instance, a carbon tax can have an additive environmental effect to policies such as subsidies for the supply of RE. By contrast, if a cap and trade system has a sufficiently stringent cap to affect emission-related decisions, then other policies have no further impact on reducing emissions  . In either case, additional policies may be needed to address market failures relating to innovation and technology diffusion.  Sub-national climate policies are increasingly prevalent, both in countries with national policies and in those without. These policies include state and provincial climate plans combining market, regulatory and information instruments, and sub-national cap-and-trade systems. In addition, transnational cooperation has arisen among sub-national actors, notably among institutional investors, NGOs seeking to govern carbon offset markets, and networks of cities seeking to collaborate in generating low-carbon urban development.  Co-benefits and adverse side effects of mitigation could affect achievement of other objectives such as those related to human health, food security, biodiversity, local environmental quality, energy access, livelihoods and equitable sustainable development:  • Mitigation scenarios reaching about 450 or 500 ppm CO2-equivalent by 2100 show reduced costs for achieving air quality and energy security objectives, with significant co-benefits for human health, ecosystem impacts and sufficiency of resources and resilience of the energy system.  • Some mitigation policies raise the prices for some energy services and could hamper the ability of societies to expand access to modern energy services to underserved populations . These potential adverse side effects can be avoided with the adoption of complementary policies such as income tax rebates or other benefit transfer mechanisms. The costs of achieving nearly universal access to electricity and clean fuels for cooking and heating are projected to be between USD 72 to 95 billion per year until 2030 with minimal effects on GHG emissions and multiple benefits in health and air pollutant reduction.  Whether or not side effects materialize, and to what extent side effects materialize, will be case- and site-specific, and depend on local circumstances and the scale, scope and pace of implementation. Many co-benefits and adverse side effects have not been well-quantified.